<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13: Husband and Wife</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-13" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Husband and Wife</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Ever since Mascarin’s visit, the Count de Mussidan had been in a deplorable state of mind. Forgetting the injury to his foot, he passed the night pacing up and down the library, cudgelling his brains for some means of breaking the meshes of the net in which he was entangled. He knew the necessity for immediate action, for he felt sure that this demand would only be the forerunner of numerous others of a similar character. He thought over and dismissed many schemes. Sometimes he had almost decided to go to the police authorities and make a clean breast; then the idea of placing the affair in the hands of a private detective occurred to him; but the more he deliberated, the more he realized the strength of the cord that bound him, and the scandal which exposure would cause. This long course of thought had in some measure softened the bitterness of his wrath, and he was able to receive his old friend <abbr>M.</abbr> de Clinchain with some degree of calmness. He was not at all surprised at the receipt of the anonymous letter⁠—indeed, he had expected that a blow would be struck in that direction. Still immersed in thought, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Mussidan hardly took heed of his wife’s presence, and he still paced the room, uttering a string of broken phrases. This excited the attention of the Countess, for her own threatened position caused her to be on the alert.</p>
				<p>“What is annoying you, Octave?” asked she. “Surely, not <abbr>M.</abbr> de Clinchain’s attack of indigestion?”</p>
				<p>For many years the Count had been accustomed to that taunting and sarcastic voice, but this feeble joke at such a moment was more than he could endure.</p>
				<p>“Don’t address me in that manner,” said he angrily.</p>
				<p>“What is the matter⁠—are you not well?”</p>
				<p>“Madame!”</p>
				<p>“Will you have the kindness to tell me what has taken place?”</p>
				<p>The color suffused the Count’s face, and his rage burst forth the more furiously from his having had to suppress it so long; and coming to a halt before the chair in which the Countess was lounging, his eyes blazing with hate and anger, he exclaimed⁠—</p>
				<p>“All I wish to tell you is, that De Breulh-Faverlay shall not marry our daughter.”</p>
				<p>Madame de Mussidan was secretly delighted at this reply, for it showed her that half the task required of her by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise had been accomplished without her interference; but in order to act cautiously, she began at once to object, for a woman’s way is always at first to oppose what she most desires.</p>
				<p>“You are laughing at me, Count!” said she. “Where can we hope to find so good a match again?”</p>
				<p>“You need not be afraid,” returned the Count, with a sneer; “you shall have another son-in-law.”</p>
				<p>These words sent a pang through the heart of the Countess. Was it an allusion to the past? or had the phrase dropped from her husband’s lips accidentally? or had he any suspicion of the influence that had been brought to bear upon her? She, however, had plenty of courage, and would rather meet misfortune face to face than await its coming in dread.</p>
				<p>“Of what other son-in-law are you speaking?” asked she negligently. “Has any other suitor presented himself? May I ask his name? Do you intend to settle my child’s future without consulting me?”</p>
				<p>“I do, madame.”</p>
				<p>A contemptuous smile crossed the face of the Countess, which goaded the Count to fury.</p>
				<p>“Am I not the master here?” exclaimed he in accents of intense rage. “Am I not driven to the exercise of my power by the menaces of a pack of villains who have wormed out the hidden secrets which have overshadowed my life from my youth upward? They can, if they desire, drag my name through the mire of infamy.”</p>
				<p>Madame de Mussidan bounded to her feet, asking herself whether her husband’s intellect had not given way.</p>
				<p>“You commit a crime!” gasped she.</p>
				<p>“I, madame, I myself! Does that surprise you? Have you never had any suspicion? Perhaps you have not forgotten a fatal accident which took place out shooting, and darkened the earlier years of our married life? Well, the thing was not an accident, but a deliberate murder committed by me. Yes, I murdered him, and this fact is known, and can be proved.”</p>
				<p>The Countess grew deadly pale, and extended her hand, as though to guard herself from some coming danger.</p>
				<p>“You are horrified, are you?” continued the Count, with a sneer. “Perhaps I inspire you with horror; but do not fear; the blood is no longer on my hands, but it is here, and is choking me.” And as he spoke he pressed his fingers upon his heart. “For twenty-three years I have endured this hideous recollection and even now when I wake in the night I am bathed in cold sweat, for I fancy I can hear the last gasps of the unhappy man.”</p>
				<p>“This is horrible, too horrible!” murmured Madame de Mussidan faintly.</p>
				<p>“Ah, but you do not know why I killed him⁠—it was because the dead man had dared to tell me that the wife I adored with all the passion of my soul was unfaithful to me.”</p>
				<p>Words of eager denial rose to the lips of the Countess; but her husband went on coldly, “And it was all true, for I heard all later on. Poor Montlouis! <em>he</em> was really loved. There was a little shop-girl, who toiled hard for daily bread, but she was a thousand times more honorable than the haughty woman of noble race that I had just married.”</p>
				<p>“Have mercy, Octave.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, and she fell a victim to her love for Montlouis. Had he lived, he would have made her his wife. After his death, she could no longer conceal her fault. In small towns the people are without mercy; and when she left the hospital with her baby at her breast, the women pelted her with mud. But for me,” continued the Count, “she would have died of hunger. Poor girl! I did not allow her much, but with it she managed to give her son a decent education. He has now grown up, and whatever happens, his future is safe.”</p>
				<p>Had <abbr>M.</abbr> de Mussidan and his wife been less deeply engaged in this hideous recital, they would have heard the stifled sobs that came from the adjoining room.</p>
				<p>The Count felt a certain kind of savage pleasure in venting the rage, that had for years been suppressed, upon the shrinking woman before him. “Would it not be a cruel injustice, madame, to draw a comparison between you and this unhappy girl? Have you always been deaf to the whisperings of conscience? and have you never thought of the future punishment which most certainly awaits you? for you have failed in the duties of daughter, wife, and mother.”</p>
				<p>Generally the Countess cared little for her husband’s reproaches, well deserved as they might be, but today she quailed before him.</p>
				<p>“With your entrance into my life,” continued the Count, “came shame and misfortune. When people saw you so gay and careless under the oak-trees of your ancestral home, who could have suspected that your heart contained a dark secret? When my only wish was to win you for my wife, how did I know that you were weaving a hideous conspiracy against me? Even when so young, you were a monster of dissimulation and hypocrisy. Guilt never overshadowed your brow, nor did falsehood dim the frankness of your eyes. On the day of our marriage I mentally reproached myself for any unworthiness. Wretched fool that I was, I was happy beyond all power of expression, when you, madame, completed the measure of your guilt by adding infidelity to it.”</p>
				<p>“It is false,” murmured the Countess. “You have been deceived.”</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Mussidan laughed a grim and terrible laugh.</p>
				<p>“Not so,” answered he; “I have every proof. This seems strange to you, does it? You have always looked upon me as one of those foolish husbands that may be duped without suspicion on their parts. You thought that you had placed a veil over my eyes, but I could see through it when you little suspected that I could do so. Why did I not tell you this before? Because I had not ceased to love you, and this fatal love was stronger than all honor, pride, and even self-respect.” He poured out this tirade with inconceivable rapidity, and the Countess listened to it in awestruck silence. “I kept silence,” continued the Count, “because I knew that on the day I uttered the truth you would be entirely lost to me. I might have killed you; I had every right to do so, but I could not live apart from you. You will never know how near the shadow of death has been to you. When I have kissed you, I have fancied that your lips were soiled with the kisses of others, and I could hardly keep my hands from clutching your ivory neck until life was extinct, and failed utterly to decide whether I loved you or hated you the most.”</p>
				<p>“Have mercy, Octave! have mercy!” pleaded the unhappy woman.</p>
				<p>“You are surprised, I can see,” answered he, with a dark smile; “yet I could give you further food for wonder if I pleased, but I have said enough now.”</p>
				<p>A tremor passed over the frame of the Countess. Was her husband acquainted with the existence of the letters? All hinged upon this. He could not have read them, or he would have spoken in very different terms, had he known the mystery contained in them.</p>
				<p>“Let me speak,” began she.</p>
				<p>“Not a word,” replied her husband.</p>
				<p>“On my honor⁠—”</p>
				<p>“All is ended; but I must not forget to tell you of one of my youthful follies. You may laugh at it, but that signifies nothing. I actually believed that I could gain your affection. I said to myself that one day you would be moved by my deep passion for you. I was a fool. As if love or affection could ever penetrate the icy barriers that guarded your heart.”</p>
				<p>“You have no pity,” wailed she.</p>
				<p>He gazed upon her with eyes in which the pent-up anger of twenty years blazed and consumed slowly. “And you, what are you? I drained to the bottom the poisoned cup held out to a deceived husband by an unfaithful wife. Each day widened the breach between us, until at last we sank into this miserable existence which is wearing out my life. I kept no watch on you; I was not made for a jailer. What I wanted was your soul and heart. To imprison the body was easy, but your soul would still have been free to wander in imagination to the meeting-place where your lover expected you. I know not how I had the courage to remain by your side. It was not to save an honor that had already gone, but merely to keep up appearances; for as long as we were nominally together the tongue of scandal was forced to remain silent.”</p>
				<p>Again the unhappy woman attempted to protest her innocence, and again the Count paid no heed to her. “I wished too,” resumed he, “to save some portion of our property, for your insatiable extravagance swallowed up all like a bottomless abyss. At last your tradespeople, believing me to be ruined, refused you credit, and this saved me. I had my daughter to think of, and have gathered together a rich dowry for her, and yet⁠—” he hesitated, and ceased speaking for a moment.</p>
				<p>“And yet,” repeated Madame de Mussidan.</p>
				<p>“I have never kissed her,” he burst forth with a fresh and terrible explosion of wrath, “without feeling a hideous doubt as to whether she was really my child.”</p>
				<p>This was more than the Countess could endure.</p>
				<p>“Enough,” she cried, “enough! I have been guilty, Octave; but not so guilty as you imagine.”</p>
				<p>“Why do you venture to defend yourself?”</p>
				<p>“Because it is my duty to guard Sabine.”</p>
				<p>“You should have thought of this earlier,” answered the Count with a sneer. “You should have moulded her mind⁠—have taught her what was noble and good, and have perused the unsullied pages of the book of her young heart.”</p>
				<p>In the deepest agitation the Countess answered⁠—</p>
				<p>“Ah, Octave, why did you not speak of this sooner, if you knew all; but I will now tell you everything.”</p>
				<p>By an inconceivable error of judgment the Count corrected her speech. “Spare us both,” said he. “If I have broken through the silence that I have maintained for many a year, it is because I knew that no word you could utter would touch my heart.”</p>
				<p>Feeling that all hope had fled, Madame de Mussidan fell backward upon the couch, while Sabine, unable to listen to any more terrible revelations, had crept into her own chamber. The Count was about to leave the drawing-room, when a servant entered, bearing a letter on a silver salver. De Mussidan tore it open; it was from <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay, asking to be released from his engagement to Sabine de Mussidan. This last stroke was almost too much for the Count’s nerves, for in this act he saw the hand of the man who had come to him with such deadly threats, and terror filled his soul as he thought of the far-stretching arm of him whose bondslave he found himself to be; but before he could collect his thoughts, his daughter’s maid went into the room crying with all her might, “Help, help; my poor mistress is dying!”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
