<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 26: At the Grand Turk</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-26" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">At the Grand Turk</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Tantaine took a cab, and, promising the cabman a handsome gratuity if he would drive fast, stopped at the spot where the Rue Blanche intersects the Rue de Douai, and told the coachman to wait for him, and entered the house where the younger Gandelu had installed the fair Madame de Chantemille. It was some time before his ring at the door was answered, but at last the door was opened by a stout, red-faced girl, with an untidy cap. Upon seeing Tantaine, she uttered an exclamation of delight, for it was the cook that had been placed in Zora’s employment by <abbr>M.</abbr> Mascarin’s agency.</p>
				<p>“Ah, Daddy Tantaine,” said she, “you are as welcome as the sun in winter.”</p>
				<p>“Hush, hush,” returned the old man, gazing cautiously round him.</p>
				<p>“Don’t be frightened,” returned the girl. “Madame has gone to a place from whence there is no return ticket, at least, for some time. You know the greater the value of an article the closer we keep it under lock and key.”</p>
				<p>Tantaine gathered from this that Rose had been arrested, and his astonishment appeared to be unmeasured.</p>
				<p>“Surely you don’t mean that she has gone to quod?” said he.</p>
				<p>“It is as I tell you,” answered she; “but come in, and have a glass of wine, while you hear all about it.”</p>
				<p>She led the old man into the dining-room, round the table in which a half dozen guests were seated, just concluding a late breakfast. Tantaine at once recognized four of the several guests as servants whom he knew from their having applied for situations at the office, and there were two men of a very unprepossessing exterior.</p>
				<p>“We are having a regular spree today,” observed the cook, handing a bottle to Tantaine; “but yesterday there was not much of a jollification here, for just as I was setting about getting the dinner two fellows came in and asked for my mistress, and as soon as they saw her they clapped their hands on her and said that she must come to the stone jug. When madame heard this she shrieked so loud as to have been heard in the next street. She would not go a foot with them, clung to the furniture and banisters, so they just took her up by the head and feet, and carried her down to a cab that was standing at the door. I seem to bring ill luck wherever I go, for this is the fourth mistress I have seen taken off in this way; but come, you are taking nothing at all.”</p>
				<p>But Tantaine had had enough, and making an excuse, retired from a debauch which he saw would continue as long as the wine held out.</p>
				<p>“All is going well,” muttered he, as he climbed into the cab; “and now for the next one.”</p>
				<p>He drove straight to the house that the elder Gandelu was building in the Champs Élysées, and putting his head out of the window, he accosted a light, active young fellow who was warning the foot passengers not to pass under the scaffolding.</p>
				<p>“Anything new, La Cordille?” enquired the old man.</p>
				<p>“No, nothing; but tell the master I am keeping a good watch.”</p>
				<p>From there Tantaine visited a footman in De Breulh’s employment, and a woman in the service of Madame de Bois Arden. Then, paying his fare, he started on foot for Father Canon’s wine shop, in the Rue <abbr>St.</abbr> Honoré, where he met Florestan, who was as saucy and supercilious to Tantaine as he was obsequious to Mascarin. But although he paid for Florestan’s dinner, all that he could extort from him was, that Sabine was terribly depressed. It was fully eight o’clock before Tantaine had got rid of Florestan, and hailing another cab, he ordered the driver to take him to the Grand Turk, in the Rue des Poissonniers.</p>
				<p>The magnificent sign of the Grand Turk dances in the breeze, and invites such youths as Toto Chupin and his companions. The whole aspect of the exterior seemed to invite the passersby to step in and try the good cheer provided within⁠—a good table d’hôte at six <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr>, coffee, tea, liquors, and a grand ball to complete the work of digestion. A long corridor leads to this earthly Eden, and the two doors at the end of it open, the one into the dining, and the other into the ballroom. A motley crew collected there for the evening meal, and on Sundays it is next to impossible to procure a seat. But the dining-room is the Grand Turk’s greatest attraction, for as soon as the dessert is over the head waiter makes a sign, and dishes and tablecloths are cleared away in a moment. The dining-room becomes a café, and the click of dominoes gives way to the rattle of forks, while beer flows freely. This, however, is nothing, for, at a second signal, huge folding doors are thrown open, and the strains of an orchestra ring out as an invitation to the ball, to which all diners are allowed free entrance. Nothing is danced but round dances, polkas, mazurkas, and waltzes.</p>
				<p>The German element was very strong at the Grand Turk, and if a gentleman wished to make himself agreeable to his fair partners, it was necessary for him, at any rate, to be well up in the Alsatian dialect. The master of the ceremonies had already called upon the votaries of Terpsichore to take their places for the waltz as Daddy Tantaine entered the hall. The scene was a most animated one, and the air heavy with the scent of beer and tobacco, and would have asphyxiated anyone not used to venture into such places.</p>
				<p>It was the first time that he had ever visited the Grand Turk, and yet anyone observing would have sworn that he was one of the regular frequenters as he marched idly through the rooms, making constant pauses at the bar. But glance around him as he might, he could see neither Toto Chupin nor Caroline Schimmel.</p>
				<p>“Have I come here for nothing,” muttered he, “or is the hour too early?”</p>
				<p>It was hard to waste time thus, but at last he sat down and ordered some beer. His eyes wandered to a large picture on the wall, representing a fat, eastern-looking man, with a white turban and loose, blue garments, seated in a crimson chair, with his feet resting upon a yellow carpet. One hand was caressing his protuberant paunch, while the other was extended toward a glass of beer. Evidently this is the Grand Turk. And finally by an odalisque, who fills his goblet with the foaming infusion of malt and hops. This odalisque is very fair and stout, and some fair Alsatian damsel has evidently sat as the model. As Tantaine was gazing upon this wondrous work of art he heard a squeaking voice just behind him.</p>
				<p>“That is certainly that young rogue Chupin,” muttered he.</p>
				<p>He turned sharply round, and two tables off, in a dark corner, he discovered the young gentleman that he had been looking for. As he gazed on the lad, he was not surprised that he had not recognized him at first, for Toto had been strangely transmogrified, and in no degree resembled the boy who had shivered in a tattered blouse in the archway near the Servants’ Registry Office. He was now gorgeous to behold. From the moment that he had got his hundred francs he had chalked out a new line of life for himself, and was busy pursuing it. He had found that he could make all his friends merry, and he had succeeded. He had made a selection from the most astounding wares that the Parisian tailor keeps on hand. He had sneered at young Gaston de Gandelu, and called him an ape; but he had aped the ape. He wore a very short, light coat, a waistcoat that was hideous from its cut and brilliancy, and trousers strapped tightly under his feet. His collar was so tall and stiff, that he had the greatest difficulty in turning his head. He had gone to a barber, and his lank hair had been artistically curled. The table in front of him was covered with glasses and bottles. Two shocking looking scamps of the true barrier bully type, with loose cravats and shiny-peaked caps, were seated by him, and were evidently his guests. Tantaine’s first impulse was to catch the debauched youth by the ear, but he hesitated for an instant and reflection conquered the impulse. With the utmost caution so that he might not attract Toto’s attention, he crept down to him, concealing himself as best he could behind one of the pillars that supported the gallery, and by this manoeuvre found himself so close to the lad that he could catch every word he said.</p>
				<p>Chupin was talking volubly.</p>
				<p>“Don’t you call me a swell, nor yet say that I brag,” said he. “I shall always make this kind of appearance, for to work in the manner I propose, a man must pay some attention to dress.”</p>
				<p>At this his companions roared with laughter.</p>
				<p>“All right,” returned Toto. “I’m precious sharp, though you may not think so, and shall go in for all kinds of elegant accomplishments, and come out a regular masher.”</p>
				<p>“Wonders will never cease,” answered one of the men. “When you go on your trip for action in the Bois among the toffs, will you take me with you?”</p>
				<p>“Anyone can go to the Bois who has money: and just tell me who are those who make money. Why, those who have plenty of cheek and a good sound business. Well, I have learned my business from some real downy cards, who made it pay well. Why should I not do the same?”</p>
				<p>With a sickening feeling of terror, Tantaine saw that the lad was half drunk. What could he be going to say? and how much did he know? Toto’s guests evidently saw that he had taken too much; but as he seemed ready to let them into a secret, they paid great attention, and exchanged a look of intelligence. The young rogue’s new clothes and his liberality all proved that he had found a means of gaining money; the only question was what the plan could be. To induce him to talk they passed the bottle rapidly and flattered him up. The younger man of the two shook his head with a smile.</p>
				<p>“I don’t believe you have any business at all,” said he.</p>
				<p>“Nor have I, if by business you mean some low handicraft. It is brain work I mean, my boy; and that’s what I do.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t doubt that a bit,” answered the elder guest coaxingly.</p>
				<p>“Come on! Tell us what it is,” broke in the other. “You don’t expect us to take your word.”</p>
				<p>“It is as easy as lying,” replied Toto. “Listen a bit, and you shall have the whole bag of tricks. Suppose I saw Polyte steal a couple of pairs of boots from a trotter-case seller’s stall⁠—”</p>
				<p>Polyte interrupted the narrator, protesting so strongly that he would not commit such an act, that Tantaine perceived at once that some such trifling act of larceny weighed heavily on his conscience.</p>
				<p>“You needn’t kick up such a row,” returned Toto. “I am only just putting it as a thing that might happen. We will say you had done the trick, and that I had twigged you. Do you know what I should go? Well, I would hunt up Polyte, and say quietly, ‘Halves, old man, or I will split.’ ”</p>
				<p>“And I should give you a crack in the jaw,” returned Polyte angrily.</p>
				<p>Forgetting his fine dress, Toto playfully put his thumb to his nose and extended his fingers.</p>
				<p>“You would not be such an ass,” said he. “You would say to yourself, ‘If I punch this chap, he will kick up no end of a row, and I shall be taken up, and perhaps sent to the mill.’ No; you would be beastly civil, and would end by doing just as I wished.”</p>
				<p>“And this is what you call your business, is it?”</p>
				<p>“Isn’t it a good one⁠—the mugs stand the racket, and the downy cards profit by it?”</p>
				<p>“But there is no novelty in this; it is only blackmail after all.”</p>
				<p>“I never said it wasn’t; but it is blackmailing perfected into a system.”</p>
				<p>As Toto made this reply he hammered on the table, calling for more drink.</p>
				<p>“But,” remarked Polyte, with an air of disappointment, “you don’t get chances every day, and the business is often a precious poor one. You can’t always be seeing chaps prigging boots.”</p>
				<p>“Pooh! pooh!” answered Toto, “if you want to make money in this business, you must keep your eyes about you. Our customers don’t come to you, but there is nothing to prevent you going to them. You can hunt until you find them.”</p>
				<p>“And where are you to hunt, if you please?”</p>
				<p>“Ah, that’s tellings.”</p>
				<p>A long silence ensued, during which Tantaine was half tempted to come forward. By doing so he would assuredly nip all explanations in the bud; but, on the other hand, he wanted to hear all the young rascal had to say. He therefore only moved a little nearer, and listened more intently.</p>
				<p>Forgetting his curls, Toto was abstractedly passing his fingers through his hair, and reflecting with all the wisdom of a muddled brain. Finally, he came to the conclusion that he might speak, and, leaning forward, he whispered⁠—</p>
				<p>“You won’t peach if I tell you the dodge?”</p>
				<p>His companions assured him that he might have every confidence in them.</p>
				<p>“Very well; I make my money in the Champs Élysées, and sometimes get a harvest twice a day.”</p>
				<p>“But there are no shoemakers’ shops there.”</p>
				<p>“You are a fool,” answered Toto contemptuously. “Do you think I blackmail thieves? That wouldn’t be half good enough. Honest people, or at least people who call themselves honest, are my game. These are the ones who can be made to pay up.”</p>
				<p>Tantaine shuddered; he remembered that Mascarin had made use of the same expression, and at once surmised that Toto must have had an occasional ear to the keyhole.</p>
				<p>“But,” objected Polyte, “honest people have no occasion to pay up.”</p>
				<p>Toto struck his glass so heavily on the table that it flew to shivers.</p>
				<p>“Will you let me speak?” said he.</p>
				<p>“Go on, go on, my boy,” returned his friend.</p>
				<p>“Well, when I’m hard up for cash, I go into the Champs Élysées, and take a seat on one of the benches. From there I keep an eye on the cabs and see who gets out of them. If a respectable woman does so, I am sure of my bird.”</p>
				<p>“Do you think you know a respectable woman when you see her?”</p>
				<p>“I should think that I did. Well, when a respectable woman gets out of a cab where she ought not to have been, she looks about her on all sides, first to the right and then to the left, settles her veil, and, as soon as she is sure that no one is watching her, sets off as if old Nick was behind her.”</p>
				<p>“Well, what do you do then?”</p>
				<p>“Why, I take the number of the cab, and follow the lady home. Then I wait until she has had time to get to her own rooms, and go to the porter and say, ‘Will you give me the name of the lady who has just come in?’ ”</p>
				<p>“And do you think the porter is fool enough to do so?”</p>
				<p>“Not a bit; I always take the precaution of having a delicate little purse in my pocket; and when the man says, as he always does, ‘I don’t know,’ I pull out the purse, and say, ‘I am sorry for that, for she dropped this as she came in, and I wanted to return it to her.’ The porter at once becomes awfully civil; he gives the name and number, and up I go. The first time I content myself with finding out if she is married or single. If she is single, it is no go; but if the reverse, I go on with the job.”</p>
				<p>“Why, what do you do next?”</p>
				<p>“Next morning I go there, and hang about until I see the husband go out. Then I go upstairs, and ask for the wife. It is ticklish work then, my lads; but I say, ‘Yesterday, madame, I was unlucky enough to leave my pocketbook in cab number so-and-so. Now, as I saw you hail the vehicle immediately after I had left it, I have come to ask you if you saw my pocketbook.’ The lady flies into a rage, denies all knowledge of the book, and threatens to have me turned out. Then, with the utmost politeness, I say, ‘I see, madame, that there is nothing to be done but to communicate the matter to your husband.’ Then she gets alarmed, and⁠—she pays.”</p>
				<p>“And you don’t see any more of her?”</p>
				<p>“Not that day; but when the funds are low, I call and say, ‘It is I again, madame; I am the poor young man who lost his money in such and such a cab on a certain day of the month.’ And so the game goes on. A dozen such clients give a fellow a very fair income. Now, perhaps, you understand why I am always so well dressed, and always have money in my pocket. When I was shabbily attired, they offered me a five-franc piece, but now they come down with a flimsy.”</p>
				<p>The young wretch spoke the truth; for to many women, who in a mad moment of passion may have forgotten themselves, and been tracked to their homes by some prowling blackmailer, life has been an endless journey of agony. Every knock at the door makes them start, and every footfall on the staircase causes a tremor as they think that the villain has come to betray their guilty secret.</p>
				<p>“That is all talk,” said Polyte; “such things are never done.”</p>
				<p>“They <em>are</em> done,” returned Toto sulkily.</p>
				<p>“Have you ever tried the dodge yourself, then?” sneered Polyte.</p>
				<p>At another time Chupin would have lied, but the fumes of the drink he had taken, added to his natural self-conceit, had deprived him of all judgment.</p>
				<p>“Well,” muttered he, “if I have not done it myself exactly, I have seen others practise it often enough⁠—on a much larger scale, it is true; but one can always do things in a more miniature fashion with perhaps a better chance of success.”</p>
				<p>“What! <em>you</em> have seen this done?”</p>
				<p>“Of course I have.”</p>
				<p>“And had you a share in the swag?”</p>
				<p>“To a certain extent. I have followed the cabs times without number, and have watched the goings on of these fine ladies and gentlemen; only I was working for others, like the dog that catches the hare, and never has a bit of it to eat. No, all I got was dry bread, with a kick or a cuff for dessert. I shan’t put up with it any longer, and have made up my mind to open on my own account.”</p>
				<p>“And who has been employing you?”</p>
				<p>A flash of sense passed through Chupin’s muddled brain. He had never wished to injure Mascarin, but merely to increase his own importance by extolling the greatness of his employer.</p>
				<p>“I worked for people who have no equal in Paris,” said he proudly. “They don’t mince matters either, I can tell you; and they have more money than you could count in six months. There is not a thing they cannot do if they desire; and if I were to tell you⁠—”</p>
				<p>He stopped short, his mouth wide open, and his eyes dilated with terror, for before him stood old Daddy Tantaine.</p>
				<p>Tantaine’s face had a most benign expression upon it, and in a most paternal voice he exclaimed⁠—</p>
				<p>“And so here you are at last, my lad; and, bless me, how fine! why, you look like a real swell.”</p>
				<p>But Toto was terribly disconcerted. The mere appearance of Tantaine dissipated the fumes of liquor which had hitherto clouded the boy’s brain, and by degrees he recollected all that he had said, and, becoming conscious of his folly, had a vague idea of some swift-coming retribution. Toto was a sharp lad, and he was by no means deceived by Tantaine’s outward semblance of friendliness, and he almost felt as if his life depended on the promptness of his decision. The question was, had the old man heard anything of the preceding conversation?</p>
				<p>“If the old rogue has been listening,” said he to himself, “I am in a hole, and no mistake.”</p>
				<p>It was, therefore, with a simulated air of ease that he answered⁠—</p>
				<p>“I was waiting for you, sir, and it was out of respect to you that I put on my very best togs.”</p>
				<p>“That was very nice of you; I ought to thank you very much. And now, will you⁠—”</p>
				<p>Toto’s courage was coming back to him rapidly.</p>
				<p>“Will you take a glass of beer, or a liquor of brandy, sir?” said he.</p>
				<p>But Daddy Tantaine excused himself on the plea that he had just been drinking.</p>
				<p>“That is all the more reason for being thirsty,” remarked Toto. “My friends and I have drunk the contents of all these bottles since dinner.”</p>
				<p>Tantaine raised his shabby hat at this semi-introduction, and the two roughs bowed smoothly. They were not entirely satisfied with the appearance of the newcomer, and thought that this would be a good moment for taking leave of their host. The waltz had just concluded, and the master of the ceremonies was repeating his eternal refrain of⁠—“Take your places, ladies and gentlemen;” and taking advantage of the noise, Toto’s friends shook hands with their host and adroitly mixed with the crowd.</p>
				<p>“Good fellows! jolly fellows;” muttered Toto, striving to catch a last glimpse of them.</p>
				<p>Tantaine gave a low, derisive whistle. “My lad,” said he, “you keep execrable company, and one day you will repent it.”</p>
				<p>“I can look after myself, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Do as you like, my lad; it is no business of mine. But, take my word for it, you will come to grief some day. I have told you that often enough.”</p>
				<p>“If the old rascal suspected anything,” thought Toto, “he would not talk in this way.”</p>
				<p>Wretched Toto! he did not know that when his spirits were rising the danger was terribly near, for Tantaine was just then saying to himself⁠—</p>
				<p>“Ah! this lad is much too clever⁠—too clever by half. If I were going on with the business, and could make it worth his while, how useful he would be to me! but just now it would be most imprudent to allow him to wander about and jabber when he gets drunk.”</p>
				<p>Meanwhile Toto had called a waiter, and, flinging a ten-franc piece on the table, said haughtily: “Take your bill out of that.” But Tantaine pushed the money back toward the lad, and, drawing another ten-franc piece from his pocket, gave it to the waiter.</p>
				<p>This unexpected act of generosity put the lad in the best possible humor. “All the better for me,” exclaimed he; “and now let us hunt up Caroline Schimmel.”</p>
				<p>“Is she here? I could not find her.”</p>
				<p>“Because you did not know where to look for her. She is at cards in the coffee-room. Come along, sir.”</p>
				<p>But Tantaine laid his hand upon the boy’s arm.</p>
				<p>“One moment,” said he. “Did you tell the woman just what I ordered you to say?”</p>
				<p>“I did not omit a single word.”</p>
				<p>“Tell me what you said, then.”</p>
				<p>“For five days,” began the lad solemnly, “your Toto has been your Caroline’s shadow. We have played cards until all sorts of hours, and I took care that she should always win. I confided to her that I had a jolly old uncle⁠—a man not without means, a widower, and crazy to be married again⁠—who had seen her and had fallen in love with her.”</p>
				<p>“Good! my lad, good! and what did she say?”</p>
				<p>“Why, she grinned like half a dozen cats; only she is a bit artful, and I saw at once that she thought I was after her cards, but the mention of my uncle’s property soon chucked her off that idea.”</p>
				<p>“Did you give my name?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, at the end, I did. I knew that she had seen you, and so I kept it back as long as I could; but as soon as I mentioned it she looked rather confused, and cried out: ‘I know him quite well.’ So you see, sir, all you have now is to settle a day for the marriage. Come on; she expects you.”</p>
				<p>Toto was right. The late domestic of the Duke de Champdoce was playing cards; but as soon as she caught sight of Toto and his pretended uncle, in spite of her holding an excellent hand, she threw up her cards, and received him with the utmost civility. Toto looked on with delight. Never had he seen the old rascal (as he inwardly called him in his heart) so polite, agreeable, and talkative. It was easy to see that Caroline Schimmel was yielding to his fascinations, for she had never had such extravagant compliments whispered in her ear in so persuasive a tone. But Tantaine did not confine his attentions to wine only: he first ordered a bowl of punch, and then followed that up by a bottle of the best brandy. All the old man’s lost youth seemed to have come back to him: he sang, he drank, and he danced. Toto watched them in utter surprise, as the old man whirled the clumsy figure of the woman round the room.</p>
				<p>And he was rewarded for this tremendous exertion, for by ten o’clock she had consented, and Caroline left the Grand Turk on the arm of her future husband, having promised to take supper with him.</p>
				<p>Next morning, when the scavengers came down from Montmartre to ply their matutinal avocations, they found the body of a woman lying on her face on the pavement. They raised her up and carried her to an hospital. She was not dead, as had been at first supposed; and when the unhappy creature came to her senses, she said that her name was Caroline Schimmel, that she had been to supper at a restaurant with her betrothed, and that from that instant she remembered nothing. At her request, the surgeon had her conveyed to her home in the Rue Mercadet.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
