<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI: A Melancholy Masher</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-21" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Melancholy Masher</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>When Mascarin spoke of suppressing the man who stood in his way as easily as if he was alluding to extinguishing a candle, he was not aware that there was one circumstance which considerably enhanced the difficulty of his task, for André had been forewarned, and this note of warning had been sounded on the day on which he had received that letter from Sabine, in which she spoke in such despairing terms of her approaching marriage, which she had been compelled to agree to to save the honor of her family. This feeling was strengthened by a long conversation he had had with <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay and the Viscountess de Bois Arden, in which it was unanimously decided that the Count and Countess de Mussidan were victims of some plot of which Henri de Croisenois was certainly one of the promoters. He had no conception on what side to look for the danger, but he had an instinctive feeling that it was impending. He prepared, therefore, to act on the defensive. It was not only his life that was in danger, but his love and his future happiness. <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay had also serious apprehensions for the safety of a man for whom he entertained so great a respect and regard.</p>
				<p>“I would lay a heavy wager,” said he, “that we have to do with some villainous blackmailers, and the difficulty of the business is, that we must do the work ourselves, for we dare not invite the aid of the police. We have no proof to offer, and the police will not stir a foot on mere suppositions, and we should not earn the thanks of those we are desirous of assisting if we called the attention of the law to certain acts in their past lives; for who can say what the terrible secret is, that some vile wretch holds over the heads of <abbr>M.</abbr> and Madame de Mussidan? And it is quite on the cards that the Count and the Countess might be compelled to join the blackmailers and oppose us. We must act with the greatest prudence and caution. Remember, that if you are out at night, you must avoid dark corners, for it would be the easiest thing in the world to put a knife into your back.”</p>
				<p>The conclusion that was arrived at, at this interview, was that for the present André and De Breulh should cease to see each other so frequently. They felt convinced that a watch had been set on them, and that their intimacy would certainly be notified to De Croisenois; and of course they had every desire to cause him to imagine that they were not acting in any way together. The arrangement, therefore, that they entered into was that each should act from his own point of vantage against Henri de Croisenois, and that when necessary they should meet in the evening to compare notes in a small café in the Champs Élysées, not far from the house in which André was at work.</p>
				<p>His courage was still as high as ever, but the first symptoms of rashness had vanished. He was a born diplomatist, and fully realized that cunning and treachery must be met by similar weapons. He must not break his engagement to <abbr>M.</abbr> Gandelu; but how could he superintend the workmen and keep an eye on Croisenois at the same time? Money was absolutely necessary, and yet he felt a strange disinclination to accept a loan from <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh. If he were to throw up his work, it would naturally create suspicion.</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Gandelu had a shrewd head, and André, remembering the old man’s kindness to him on all occasions, determined to confide the matter to him, and with this object he called on him the next morning as the clock was striking nine. His surprise was extreme when he saw Gaston de Gandelu in the courtyard. He was just the same looking Gaston, the lover of Madame de Chantemille, to the outward eye, but some grave calamity had evidently entirely changed the inner man. He was smoking his cigar with an air of desperation, and seemed to be utterly weary of the world and its belongings.</p>
				<p>At the moment André entered the young man caught sight of him.</p>
				<p>“Halloo!” said he; “here is my artistic friend. I lay ten to one that you have come to ask my father to do you a favor.”</p>
				<p>“You are quite right; is he at home?”</p>
				<p>“The governor is in the sulks; he has shut himself up, and will not see me.”</p>
				<p>“You are joking.”</p>
				<p>“Not I; the old man is a regular despot, and I am sick of everything.”</p>
				<p>Noticing that one of the grooms was listening, Gaston had sufficient sense to draw André a little on one side.</p>
				<p>“Do you know,” asked he, “that the governor has docked my screw and vows that he will advertise himself as not responsible for the debts of yours truly; but I cannot think he will do so, for that would be a regular smash-up for me. You haven’t such a trifle as ten thousand francs about you that you could lend me, have you? I’d give twenty thousand for the accommodation when I came of age.”</p>
				<p>“I must say⁠—,” began André.</p>
				<p>“All right; never mind; I understand. If you had the ready, you wouldn’t be hanging about here; but for all that, I must have the cash. Hang it all, I signed bills to that amount payable to Verminet. Do you know the fellow?”</p>
				<p>“Not at all.”</p>
				<p>“Where were you dragged up? Why, he is the head of the Mutual Loan Society. The only nuisance is, that to make matters run a bit smooth, I wrote down the wrong name. Do you tumble, eh?”</p>
				<p>“But, great heavens! that is forgery,” said André, aghast.</p>
				<p>“Not a bit, for I always intended to pay; besides, I wanted the money to square Van Klopen. You know <em>him</em>, I suppose?”</p>
				<p>“No.”</p>
				<p>“Well, he is the chap to dress a girl. I had those costumes for Zora from him; but it is out and out the governor’s fault. Why did he drive me to desperation? Yes, it is all the old man’s doing. He wasn’t satisfied with pitching into me, but he collared that poor, helpless lamb and shut her up. She never did him any harm, and I call it a right down cowardly and despicable act to hurt Zora.”</p>
				<p>“Zora,” repeated André, who did not recognize the name.</p>
				<p>“Yes, Zora; you know; you had a feed with us one day.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, yes; you mean Rose.”</p>
				<p>“That’s it; but I don’t like anyone to call her by that ugly, common name. Well, the governor has gone mad about her, and filed a complaint against her of decoying a minor, as if I was a fellow anyone could decoy. Well, the end of it was, that she is now in the prison of <abbr>St.</abbr> Lazare.”</p>
				<p>The tears started to the young man’s eyes as he related this grievance.</p>
				<p>“Poor Zora,” he added; “I was never mashed on a woman like I was on her. And then what a splendid form she has! Why, the hairdresser said he had never seen such hair in his life; and she is at <abbr>St.</abbr> Lazare. As soon as the police came for her, her first thoughts were of me, and she shrieked out, ‘Poor Gaston will kill himself when he hears of this.’ The cook told me this, and added that her mistress’s sufferings were terrible. And she is at <abbr>St.</abbr> Lazare. I tried to see her, but it was no go;” and here the boy’s voice broke into a sob.</p>
				<p>“Come,” said André, “keep up your spirits.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! you shall see if, as soon as I am twenty-one, I don’t marry her. I don’t put all the blame on the old man. He has been advised by his lawyer, a beast by the name of Catenac. Do you know <em>him</em>?”</p>
				<p>“No.”</p>
				<p>“You don’t seem to know anyone. Well, I shall send him a challenge tomorrow. I have got my seconds all ready. By the way, would you like to act for me? I can easily get rid of one of the others.”</p>
				<p>“I have had no experience in such matters.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, then you would be of no use. My seconds must put him into a regular blue funk.”</p>
				<p>“In that case⁠—”</p>
				<p>“No; I know what you are going to say: you mean that I had best look out for a military swell; but, after all, the matter lies in a nutshell. I am the insulted party, and draw pistols at ten paces. If that frightens him, he will make the governor drop all this rubbish.”</p>
				<p>Had his mind not been so much occupied, this rhodomontade on Gaston’s part would have amused André very much, but now he asked himself what would be the quickest way to escape from him.</p>
				<p>Just at this moment a servant emerged from the house.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” said he, addressing André, “my master has seen you from his window, and begs that you will go up to him at once.”</p>
				<p>“I will be with him immediately,” answered André; and, holding out his hand to Gaston, he took leave of him with a few words of encouragement.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
