<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV: Father and Daughter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Father and Daughter</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Van Klopen, the man-milliner, knew Paris and its people thoroughly like all tradesmen who are in the habit of giving large credit. He knew all about the business of his customers, and never forgot an item of information when he received one. Thus, when Mascarin spoke to him about the father of the lovely Flavia, whose charms had set the susceptible heart of Paul Violaine in a blaze, the arbiter of fashion had replied⁠—</p>
			<p>“Martin Rigal; yes, I know him; he is a banker.” And a banker, indeed, Martin Rigal was, dwelling in a magnificent house in the Rue Montmartre. The bank was on the ground floor, while his private rooms were in the story above. Though he did not do business in a very large way, yet he was a most respectable man, and his connection was chiefly with the smaller tradespeople, who seem to live a strange kind of hand-to-mouth existence, and who might be happy were it not for the constant reappearance of that grim phantom⁠—bills to be met. Nearly all these persons were in the banker’s hands entirely. Martin Rigal used his power despotically and permitted no arguments, and speedily quelled rebellion on the part of any new customer who ventured to object to his arbitrary rules. In the morning the banker was never to be seen, being engaged in his private office, and not a clerk would venture to knock at his door. Even had one done so, no reply would have been returned; for the experiment had been tried, and it was believed that nothing short of an alarm of fire would have brought him out.</p>
			<p>The banker was a big man, quite bald, his face was clean shaved, and his little gray eyes twinkled incessantly. His manner was charmingly courteous, and he said the most cruel things in the most honied accents, and invariably escorted to the door the man whom he would sell up the next day. In his dress he affected a fashionable style, much used by the modern school of Shylocks. When not in business, he was a pleasant, and, as some say, a witty companion. He was not looked on as an ascetic, and did not despise those little pleasures which enable us to sustain life’s tortuous journey. He liked a good dinner, and had always a smile ready for a young and attractive face. He was a widower, and all his love was concentrated on his daughter. He did not keep a very extravagant establishment, but the report in the neighborhood was that Mademoiselle Flavia, the daughter of the eminent banker, would one day come into millions. The banker always did his business on foot, for the sake of his health, as he said; but Flavia had a sweet little Victoria, drawn by two thoroughbred horses, to drive in the Bois de Boulogne, under the protection of an old woman, half companion and half servant, who was driven half mad by her charge’s caprices. As yet her father has never denied her anything. He worked harder than all his clerks put together, for, after having spent the morning in his counting house over his papers, he received all business clients.</p>
			<p>On the day after Flavia and Paul Violaine had met at Van Klopen’s, <abbr>M.</abbr> Martin Rigal was, at about half-past five, closeted with one of his female clients. She was young, very pretty, and dressed with simple elegance, but the expression of her face was profoundly melancholy. Her eyes were overflowing with tears, which she made vain efforts to restrain.</p>
			<p>“If you refuse to renew our bill, sir, we are ruined,” said she. “I could meet it in January. I have sold all my trinkets, and we are existing on credit.”</p>
			<p>“Poor little thing!” interrupted the banker.</p>
			<p>Her hopes grew under these words of pity.</p>
			<p>“And yet,” continued she, “business has never been so brisk. New customers are constantly coming in, and though our profits are small, the returns are rapid.”</p>
			<p>As Martin Rigal heard her exposition of the state of affairs, he nodded gravely.</p>
			<p>“That is all very well,” said he at last, “but this does not make the security you offer me of any more value. I have more confidence in you.”</p>
			<p>“But remember, sir, that we have thirty thousand francs’ worth of stock.”</p>
			<p>“That is not what I was alluding to,” and the banker accompanied these words with so meaning a look, that the poor woman blushed scarlet and almost lost her nerve. “Your stock,” said he, “is of no more value in my eyes than the bill you offer me. Suppose, for instance, you were to become bankrupt, the landlord might come down upon everything, for he has great power.”</p>
			<p>He broke off abruptly, for Flavia’s maid, as a privileged person, entered the room without knocking.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said she, “my mistress wishes to see you at once.”</p>
			<p>The banker got up directly. “I am coming,” said he; then, taking the hand of his client, he led her to the door, repeating: “Do not worry yourself; all the difficulties shall be got through. Come again, and we will talk them over;” and before she could thank him he was half way to his daughter’s apartment. Flavia had summoned her father to show him a new costume which had just been sent home by Van Klopen, and which pleased her greatly. Flavia’s costume was a masterpiece of fashionable bad taste, which makes women look all alike and destroys all appearance of individuality. It was a mass of frills, furbelows, fringes, and flutings of rare hue and form, making a series of wonderful contrasts. Standing in the middle of the room, with every available candle alight, for the day was fading away, she was so dainty and pretty that even the bizarre dress of Van Klopen’s was unable to spoil her appearance. As she turned round, she caught sight of her father in a mirror, panting with the haste he had made in running upstairs.</p>
			<p>“What a time you have been!” said she pettishly.</p>
			<p>“I was with a client,” returned he apologetically.</p>
			<p>“You ought to have got rid of him at once. But never mind that; look at me and tell me plainly what you think of me.”</p>
			<p>She had no need to put the question, for the most intense admiration beamed in his face.</p>
			<p>“Exquisite, delicious, heavenly!” answered he.</p>
			<p>Flavia, accustomed as she was to her father’s compliments, was highly delighted. “Then you think that he will like me?” asked she.</p>
			<p>She alluded to Paul Violaine, and the banker heaved a deep sigh as he replied⁠—</p>
			<p>“Is it possible that any human being exists that you cannot please?”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” mused she, “if it were anyone but he, I should have no doubts or misgivings.”</p>
			<p>Martin Rigal took a seat near the fire, and, drawing his daughter to him, pressed a fond kiss upon her brow, while she with the grace and activity of a cat, nestled upon his knee. “Suppose, after all, that he should not like me,” murmured she; “I should die of grief.”</p>
			<p>The banker turned away his face to hide the gloom that overspread it. “Do you love him, then, even now?” asked he.</p>
			<p>She paused for a moment, and he added, “More than you do me?”</p>
			<p>Flavia pressed her father’s hand between both her palms and answered with a musical laugh, “How silly you are, papa! Why, of course I love you. Are you not my father? I love you too because you are kind and do all I wish, and because you are always telling me that you love me. Because you are like the cupids in the fairy stories⁠—dear old people who give their children all their heart’s desire; I love you for my carriage, my horses, and my lovely dresses; for my purse filled with gold, for my beautiful jewelry, and for all the lovely presents you make me.”</p>
			<p>Every word she spoke betrayed the utter selfishness of her soul, and yet her father listened with a fixed smile of delight on his face.</p>
			<p>“And why do you love him?” asked he.</p>
			<p>“Because⁠—because,” stammered the girl, “first, because he is himself; and then⁠—well, I can’t say, but I <em>do</em> love him.”</p>
			<p>Her accents betrayed such depth of passion that the father uttered a groan of anguish.</p>
			<p>Flavia caught the expression of his features, and burst into a fit of laughter.</p>
			<p>“I really believe that you are jealous,” said she, as if she were speaking to a spoiled child. “That is very naughty of you; you ought to be ashamed of yourself. I tell you that the first time I set eyes upon him at Van Klopen’s, I felt a thrill of love pierce through my heart, such love as I never felt for a human being before. Since then, I have known no rest. I cannot sleep, and instead of blood, liquid fire seems to come through my veins.”</p>
			<p>Martin Rigal raised his eyes to the ceiling in mute surprise at this outburst of feeling.</p>
			<p>“You do not understand me,” went on Flavia. “You are the best of fathers, but, after all, you are but a man. Had I a mother, she would comprehend me better.”</p>
			<p>“What could your mother have done for you more than I? Have I neglected anything for your happiness?” asked the banker, with a sigh.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps nothing; for there are times when I hardly understand my own feelings.”</p>
			<p>In gloomy silence the banker listened to the narrative of his daughter’s state of mind; then he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“All shall be as you desire, and the man you love shall be your husband.”</p>
			<p>The girl was almost beside herself with joy, and, throwing her arms around his neck, pressed kiss upon kiss on his cheeks and forehead.</p>
			<p>“Darling,” said she, “I love you for this more than for anything that you have given me in my life.”</p>
			<p>The banker sighed again; and Flavia, shaking her pretty little fist at him, exclaimed, “What is the meaning of that sigh, sir? Do you by any chance regret your promise? But never mind that. How do you mean to bring him here without causing any suspicion?”</p>
			<p>A benevolent smile passed over her father’s face, as he answered⁠—</p>
			<p>“That, my pet, is my secret.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, keep it; I do not care what means you use, as long as I see him soon, very soon⁠—tonight perhaps, in an hour, or even in a few minutes. You say <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise will bring him here; he will sit at our table. I can look at him without trouble, I shall hear his voice⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Silly little puss!” broke in the banker; “or, rather, I should say, unhappy child.”</p>
			<p>“Silly, perhaps; but why should you say unhappy?”</p>
			<p>“You love him too fondly, and he will take advantage of your feeling for him.”</p>
			<p>“Never; I do not believe it,” answered the girl.</p>
			<p>“I hope to heaven, darling, that my fears may never be realized. But he is not the sort of husband that I intended for you; he is a composer.”</p>
			<p>“And is that anything against him!” exclaimed Flavia in angry tones; “one would think from your sneers that this was a crime. Not only is he a composer, but he is a genius. I can read that in his face. He may be poor, but I am rich enough for both, and he will owe all to me; so much the better, for then he will not be compelled to give lessons for his livelihood, and he will have leisure to compose an opera more beautiful than any that Gounod has ever written, and I shall share all his glory. Why, perhaps, he may even sing his own songs to me alone.”</p>
			<p>Her father noticed her state of feverish excitement and gazed upon her sadly. Flavia’s mother had been removed from this world at the early age of twenty-four by that insidious malady, consumption, which defies modern medical science, and in a brief space changes a beautiful girl into a livid corpse, and the father viewed her excited manner, flushed cheeks, and sparkling eyes with tears and dismay.</p>
			<p>“By heavens!” cried he, bursting into a sudden fit of passion; “if ever he ill treats you, he is a dead man.”</p>
			<p>The girl was startled at the sudden ferocity of his manner.</p>
			<p>“What have I done to make you angry?” asked she; “and why do you have such evil thoughts of him?”</p>
			<p>“I tremble for you, in whom my whole soul is wrapped up,” answered the banker. “This man has robbed me of my child’s heart, and you will be happier with him than you are with your poor old father. I tremble because of your inexperience and his weakness, which may prove a source of trouble to you.”</p>
			<p>“If he is weak, all the better; my will can guide him.”</p>
			<p>“You are wrong,” replied her father, “as many other women have been before you. You believe that weak and vacillating dispositions are easily controlled, but I tell you that this is an error. Only determined characters can be influenced, and it is on substantial foundations that we find support.”</p>
			<p>Flavia made no reply, and her father drew her closer to him.</p>
			<p>“Listen to me, my child,” said he. “You will never have a better friend than I am. You know that I would shed every drop of blood in my veins for you. He is coming, so search your heart to discover if this is not some mere passing fancy.”</p>
			<p>“Father!” cried she.</p>
			<p>“Remember that your happiness is in your own hands now, so be careful and conceal your feelings, and do not let him discover how deep your love is for him. Men’s minds are so formed that while they blame a woman for duplicity, they complain far more if she acts openly and allows her feelings to be seen⁠—”</p>
			<p>He paused, for the doorbell rang. Flavia’s heart gave a bound of intense joy.</p>
			<p>“He has come!” gasped she, and, with a strong effort to retain her composure, she added, “I will obey you, my dear father; I will not come here again until I have entirely regained my composure. Do not fear, and I will show you that your daughter can act a part as well as any other woman.”</p>
			<p>She fled from the room as the door opened, but it was not Paul who made his appearance, but some other guests⁠—a stout manufacturer and his wife, the latter gorgeously dressed, but with scarcely a word to say for herself. For this evening the banker had issued invitations to twenty of his friends, and among this number Paul would scarcely be noticed. He in due time made his appearance with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise, who had volunteered to introduce him into good society. Paul felt ill at ease; he had just come from the hands of a fashionable tailor, who, thanks to Mascarin’s influence, had in forty-eight hours prepared an evening suit of such superior cut that the young man hardly knew himself in it. Paul had suffered a good deal from conflicting emotions after the visit to Van Klopen’s, and more than once regretted the adhesion that he had given to Mascarin’s scheme; but a visit the next day from Hortebise, and the knowledge that the fashionable physician was one of the confederates, had reconciled him to the position he had promised to assume.</p>
			<p>He was moreover struck with Flavia’s charms, and dazzled with the accounts of her vast prospective fortune. To him, Hortebise, gay, rich, and careless, seemed the incarnation of happiness, and contributed greatly to stifle the voice of Paul’s conscience. He would, however, perhaps have hesitated had he known what the locket contained that dangled so ostentatiously from the doctor’s chain.</p>
			<p>Before they reached the banker’s door, driven in the doctor’s elegant brougham, a similar one to which Paul mentally declared he would have, as soon as circumstances would permit, the young man’s mentor spoke.</p>
			<p>“Let me say a few words to you. You have before you a chance which is seldom afforded to any young man, whatever his rank and social standing. Mind that you profit by it.”</p>
			<p>“You may be sure I will,” said Paul, with a smile of self-complacency.</p>
			<p>“Good, dear boy; but let me fortify your courage with a little of my experience. Do you know what an heiress really is?”</p>
			<p>“Well, really⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Permit me to continue. An heiress and more so if she is an only child, is generally a very disagreeable person, headstrong, capricious, and puffed up with her own importance. She is utterly spoiled by the flattery to which she has been accustomed from her earliest years, and thinks that all the world is made to bend before her.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” answered Paul, a little discomfited. “I hope it is not Mademoiselle Flavia’s portrait that you have been sketching?”</p>
			<p>“Not exactly,” answered the doctor, with a laugh. “But I must warn you that even she has certain whims and fancies. For instance, I am quite sure that she would give a suitor every encouragement, and then repulse him without rhyme or reason.”</p>
			<p>Paul, who up to this time had only seen the bright side of affairs, was a good deal disconcerted.</p>
			<p>“Buy why should you introduce me to her then?”</p>
			<p>“In order that you may win her. Have you not everything to insure success? She will most likely receive you with the utmost cordiality; but beware of being too sanguine. Even if she makes desperate love to you, I say, take care; it may be only a trap; for, between ourselves, a girl who has a million stitched to her petticoats is to be excused if she endeavors to find out whether the suitor is after her or her money.”</p>
			<p>Just then the brougham stopped, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise and his young friend entered the house in the Rue Montmartre, where they were cordially greeted by the banker.</p>
			<p>Paul glanced round, but there were no signs of Flavia, nor did she make her appearance until five minutes before the dinner hour, when the guests flocked round her. She had subdued all her emotions, and not a quiver of the eyelids disclosed the excitement under which she was laboring. Her eye rested on Paul, and he bowed ceremoniously. The banker was delighted, for he had not believed much in her self-command. But Flavia had taken his advice to heart, and when seated at table abstained from casting a glance in Paul’s direction. When dinner was over and many of the guests had sat down to whist; Flavia ventured to approach Paul, and in a low voice, which shook a little in spite of her efforts, said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Will you not play me one of your own compositions, <abbr>M.</abbr> Violaine?”</p>
			<p>Paul was but a medium performer, but Flavia seemed in the seventh heaven, while her father and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise, who had taken their seats not far away, watched the young couple with much anxiety.</p>
			<p>“How she adores him!” whispered the banker. “And yet I cannot judge of the effect that she has produced upon him.”</p>
			<p>“Surely Mascarin will worm it all out of him tomorrow,” returned the doctor. “Tomorrow the poor fellow will have his hands full, for there is to be a general meeting, when we shall hear all about Catenac’s ideas, and I shall be glad to know what Croisenois’s conduct will be when he knows what he is wanted for.”</p>
			<p>It was growing late, and the guests began to drop off. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise signalled to Paul, and they left the house together. According to the promise to her father, Flavia had acted her part so well, that Paul did not know whether he had made an impression or not.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
