<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4: A Financial Transaction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Financial Transaction</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Daumon was expecting a visit from the young man, and had been waiting for him with the cool complacency of a bird-catcher, who, having arranged all his lines and snares, stands with folded arms until his feathered victims fall into his net. The line that he had displayed before the young man’s eyes was the sight of liberty. Daumon had emissaries everywhere, and knew perfectly well what was going on at the Château de Champdoce, and could have repeated the exact words made use of by the Duke in his last conversation with his son, and was aware of the leave of liberty that had been granted to Norbert, and was as certain as possible that this small concession would only hasten the rebellion of the young Marquis.</p>
				<p>He often took his evening stroll in the direction of Champdoce, and, pipe in mouth, would meditate over his schemes. Pausing on the brow of a hill that overlooked the Château, he would shake his fist, and mutter⁠—</p>
				<p>“He will come; ah, yes, he must come to me!”</p>
				<p>And he was in the right, for, after a week spent in indecision, Norbert knocked at the door of his father’s bitterest enemy. Daumon, concealed behind the window curtain, had watched his approach, and it was with the same air of deference that he had welcomed the Marquis, as he took care to call him; but he affected to be so overcome by the honor of this visit that he could only falter out⁠—</p>
				<p>“Marquis, I am your most humble servant.”</p>
				<p>And Norbert, who had expected a very warm greeting, was much disconcerted. For a moment he thought of going away again, but his pride would not permit him to do so, for he had said to himself that it would be an act of a fool to go away this time without having accomplished anything.</p>
				<p>“I want to have a bit of advice from you, Counsellor,” said he; “for as I have but little experience in a certain matter, I should like to avail myself of your knowledge.”</p>
				<p>“You do me too much honor, Marquis,” murmured the Counsellor with a low bow.</p>
				<p>“But surely,” said the young man, “you must feel that you are bound to assist me after all you told me a day or two back. You mentioned two means by which I could regain my freedom, and hinted that there was a third one. I have come to you today to ask you what it was.”</p>
				<p>Never did any man more successfully assume an air of astonishment than did Daumon at this moment.</p>
				<p>“What,” said he, “do you absolutely remember those idle words I made use of then?”</p>
				<p>“I do most decidedly.”</p>
				<p>The villain’s heart of Daumon was filled with delight, but he replied⁠—</p>
				<p>“Oh, Marquis! you must remember that we say many things that really have no special meaning, for between act and intention there is a tremendous difference. I often speak too freely, and that has more than once got me into trouble.”</p>
				<p>Norbert was no fool, in spite of his want of education, and the hot blood of his ancestors coursed freely through his veins. He now struck the butt-end of his gun heavily upon the floor.</p>
				<p>“You treated me like a simpleton, then, it appears?” remarked he angrily.</p>
				<p>“My dear Marquis⁠—”</p>
				<p>“And imagined that you could trifle with me. You managed to learn my real feelings for your own amusement; but, take care; this may cost you more than you think.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, Marquis, can you believe that I would act so basely?”</p>
				<p>“What else can I think?”</p>
				<p>Daumon paused for a moment, and then said⁠—</p>
				<p>“You will be angry when you hear what I have to say, but I cannot help speaking the truth.”</p>
				<p>“I shall not be angry, and you can speak freely.”</p>
				<p>“I am but a very poor and humble man. What have I to gain by securing any note, and by encouraging you to brave your father’s anger? Just think what must happen if I opposed the all-powerful Duke de Champdoce; why, I might find myself in prison in next to no time.”</p>
				<p>“And for what reason, if you please?” asked Norbert.</p>
				<p>“Have you never studied law in the slightest degree, Marquis? Dear me, how neglectful some parents are! You are not of age, and there is a certain article, 354 in the code, that could be so worked that a poor humble creature like me could be locked up for perhaps five years. The law deals very hardly when anyone has dealings with a minor, the more especially when the father is a man of untold wealth. If the Duke should ever discover⁠—”</p>
				<p>“But how could he ever do so?”</p>
				<p>Daumon made no reply, and his silence so plainly showed Norbert that the Counsellor did not trust him, that he repeated the question in an angry voice.</p>
				<p>“Your blind subservience to your father is too well known.”</p>
				<p>“You believe that I should confess everything to him?”</p>
				<p>“You yourself told me that when his eyes were fixed on yours you could not avoid yielding to his will.”</p>
				<p>Norbert’s anger gradually died away, as he replied in accents of intense bitterness⁠—</p>
				<p>“I may be a savage, but I am not likely to become a traitor. If I once promised to keep a secret, no measures or tortures would tear it from me. I may fear my father, but I am a Champdoce, and fear no other mortal man. Do you understand me?”</p>
				<p>“But, Marquis⁠—”</p>
				<p>“No other mortal man,” interrupted Norbert sternly, “will ever know from me that we have ever exchanged words together.”</p>
				<p>An expression passed over the features of the Counsellor which cast a ray of hope upon the young man’s heart.</p>
				<p>“Upon my word,” said he, “anyone would judge from my hesitation that I had some wrong motive in acting as I am doing, but I never give bad advice, and anyone will tell you the same about me, and this is the breviary by which I regulate all my actions.”</p>
				<p>As he spoke, he took a book from his desk, and waved it aloft.</p>
				<p>Norbert looked puzzled and angry.</p>
				<p>“What do you mean?” asked he.</p>
				<p>“Nothing, Marquis, nothing; have patience; your majority is not far off, and you have only a few years to wait. Remember that your father is an old man; let him carry out his plan for a few years longer, and⁠—”</p>
				<p>Norbert struck his fist savagely upon the table, crying out furiously. “It was not worth my coming here if this was all that you had to say;” and, whistling to Bruno, the young man prepared to quit the room.</p>
				<p>“Ah, Marquis! you are far too hasty,” said the Counsellor humbly.</p>
				<p>Norbert paused. “Speak then,” answered he roughly.</p>
				<p>In a low, impressive voice, Daumon went on.</p>
				<p>“Remember, Marquis, that though I should like to see you have a better understanding with your father, yet, at the same time, I should like to work for the happiness of you both. I am like a judge in court, who endeavors to bring about a compromise between the litigants. Can you not, while affecting perfect submission, live in a manner more suited to you? There are many young men of your age in a precisely similar position.”</p>
				<p>Norbert took a step forward and began to listen earnestly.</p>
				<p>“You have more liberty now,” continued Daumon. “Pray, does your father know how you employ your time?”</p>
				<p>“He knows that I can do nothing but shoot.”</p>
				<p>“Well, I know what I would do if I were your age.”</p>
				<p>“And what would that be?”</p>
				<p>“First of all, I would stay at home sufficiently often not to arouse papa’s suspicions, and the rest of my leisure I would spend in Poitiers, which is a very pleasant town. I could take nice rooms in which I could be my own master. At Champdoce I could keep to my peasant’s clothes, but in Poitiers I would be dressed by the best tailor. I should pick up a few boon companions amongst the jolly students, and have plenty of friends, ladies as well as gentlemen. I would dance, sing, and drink, and would dip into every kind of life, so that⁠—”</p>
				<p>He paused for a second and then said, “There ought to be a fast horse or so in your father’s stables, eh? Well then, if there are, why not take one for your own riding? Then at night, when you are supposed to be snug between the sheets, creep down to the stable, clap a bridle on the horse, and, hey, presto! you are in Poitiers. Put on the clothes suitable to the handsome young noble you are, and have a joyous carouse with your many companions; and if you do, next day, not choose to go back until the morning, the servants will only tell your father that you are out shooting.”</p>
				<p>Norbert was a thoroughly strong, honest youth, and the idea of meanness and duplicity were most repugnant to his feelings in general; and yet he listened eagerly to this proposition, for oppression had utterly changed his nature. The career of dissipation and pleasure proposed so adroitly by Daumon dazzled his imagination and his eyes began to sparkle.</p>
				<p>“Well,” asked the Counsellor invidiously, “and, pray, what is there to prevent you doing all this?”</p>
				<p>“Want of funds,” returned Norbert, with a deep sigh; “I should want a great deal, and I have hardly any; if I were to ask my father for any, he would refuse me, and wonder⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Have you no friends who would find you such a sum as you would require until you came of age?”</p>
				<p>“None at all;” and, overwhelmed with the sense of his utter helplessness, Norbert sank back upon a chair.</p>
				<p>After a brief period of reflection, Daumon spoke with apparent reluctance⁠—</p>
				<p>“No, Marquis, I cannot see you so miserably unhappy without doing my best to help you. A man is a fool who puts out his hand to interfere between father and son, but I will find money to lend you what you want.”</p>
				<p>“Will you do so, Counsellor?”</p>
				<p>“Unluckily I cannot, I am only a poor fellow, but some of the neighboring farmers entrust me with their savings for investment. Why should I not use them to make you comfortable and happy?”</p>
				<p>Norbert was almost choked with emotion. “Can this be done?” asked he eagerly.</p>
				<p>“Yes, Marquis; but you understand that you will have to pay very heavy interest on account of the risk incurred in lending money to a minor. For the law does not recognize such transactions, and I myself do not like them. If I were in your place, I would not borrow money on these terms, but wait until some friend could help me.”</p>
				<p>“I have no friends,” again answered the young man.</p>
				<p>Daumon shrugged his shoulders with the air of a man who says: “Well, I suppose I must give in, but at any rate I have done my duty.” Then he began aloud, “I am perfectly aware, Marquis, that, considering the wealth that must one day be yours, this transaction is a most paltry one.”</p>
				<p>He then went on to enumerate the conditions of the loan, and at each clause he would stop and say, “Do you understand this?”</p>
				<p>Norbert understood him so well that at the end of the conversation, in exchange for the thousand francs, he handed to the Counsellor the promissory notes for four thousand francs each, which were made payable to two farmers, who were entirely in Daumon’s clutches. The young man, in addition, pledged his solemn word of honor that he would never disclose that the Counsellor had anything to do with the transaction.</p>
				<p>“Remember, Marquis, prudence must be strictly observed. Come here to me only after the night has set in.”</p>
				<p>This was the last piece of advice that Daumon gave his client; and when he was again left alone, he perused with feelings of intense gratification, the two notes that Norbert had signed. They were entirely correct and binding, and drawn up in proper legal form. He had made up his mind to let the young man have all his savings, amounting to some forty thousand francs, and not to press for payment until the young man come into his fortune.</p>
				<p>All this, however, hinged upon Norbert’s silence and discretion, for, at the first inkling of the matter, the Duke would scatter all the edifice to the winds; but of this happening Daumon had no fear.</p>
				<p>As Norbert walked along, followed by his dog, he could not resist putting his hands into his pockets and fingering the tempting, crisp banknotes which lurked there, and making sure that it was a reality and not a dream. That night seemed interminable; and the next morning, with his gun on his shoulder and his dog at his heels, he walked briskly along the road to Poitiers. He had determined to follow Daumon’s advice⁠—to have suitable rooms, and to make the acquaintance of some of the students. On his arrival at Poitiers, which he had only once before visited, Norbert felt like a half-fledged bird who knows not how to use its wings. He wandered about the streets, not knowing how to commence what he wanted. Finally, after a sojourn in the town of a very brief duration, he went to the inn where he had breakfasted with his father on his former visit, and, after an unsatisfactory meal, returned to Champdoce, as wretched as he had been joyful and hopeful at his early start in the morning. But later on he went to Daumon, who put him in communication with a friend who, for a commission, took the unsophisticated lad about, hired some furnished rooms, and finally introduced him to the best ladies in the town, while Norbert ordered clothes to the tune of five hundred francs. He now thought himself on the high road to the full gratification of his desires; but, alas! the reality, compared with what his imagination had pictured, appeared rank and chilling. His timidity and shyness arrested all his progress; he required an intimate friend, and where could he hit upon one?</p>
				<p>One evening he entered the Café Castille. He found a large number of students collected there, and was a little disgusted at their turbulent gayety, and, hastily withdrawing, he spent the rest of the weary evening in his own rooms with Bruno, who, for his part, would have much preferred the open country. He had really only enjoyed the four evenings on which he had visited the Martre; but these limited hours of happiness did not make up for the web of falsehood in which he had enmeshed himself, or the daily dread of detection in which he lived.</p>
				<p>The Duke had noticed his son’s absence, but his suspicions were very wide of the truth. One morning he laughed at Norbert on the continued non-success of his shooting.</p>
				<p>“Do your best today, my boy,” said he, “and try and bring home some game, for we shall have a guest to dinner.”</p>
				<p>“To dinner, here?”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” answered the Duke suppressing a smile. “Yes, actually here; <abbr>M.</abbr> Puymandour is coming, and the dining-room must be opened and put into proper order.”</p>
				<p>“I will try and kill some game,” answered Norbert to himself as he started on his errand.</p>
				<p>This, however, was more easily resolved on than executed. At last he caught sight of an impudent rabbit near a hedge; he raised his gun and fired. A shriek of anguish followed the report, and Bruno dashed into the hedge, barking furiously.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
