<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX: The Honor of the Name</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Honor of the Name</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The account that the Duke of Champdoce had given of <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour’s mad longing for rank and title was true, and afforded a melancholy instance of that peculiar kind of foolish vanity. He was a much happier man in his younger days, when he was known simply as Palouzet, which was his father’s name, whose only wish for distinction was to be looked upon as an honest man. In those days he was much looked up to and respected, as a man who had possessed brains enough to amass a very large fortune by strictly honest means. All this vanished, however, when the unhappy idea occurred to him to affix the title of Count to the name of an estate that he had recently purchased.</p>
			<p>From that moment, all his tribulations in life may have been said to have commenced. The nobility laughed at his assumption of hereditary rank, while the middle classes frowned at his pretensions to be superior to them, so that he passed the existence of a shuttlecock, continually suspended in the air, and struck at and dismissed from either side.</p>
			<p>It may, therefore, be easily imagined how excessively anxious he was to bring about the marriage between his daughter Marie and the son of that mighty nobleman, the Duke of Champdoce. He had offered to sacrifice one-third of his fortune for the honor of forming this connection, and would have given up the whole of it, could he but have seen a child in whose veins ran the united blood of Palouzet and the Champdoce seated upon his knee. A marriage of this kind would have given him a real position; for to have a Champdoce for a son-in-law would compel all scoffers to bridle their tongues.</p>
			<p>The day after he had received a favorable reply from the Duke, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour thought that it was time to inform his daughter of his intentions. He never thought that she would make any opposition, and, of course, supposed that she would be as delighted as he was at the honor that awaited her. He was seated in a magnificently furnished room which he called his library when he arrived at this conclusion, and ringing the bell, ordered the servant to inquire of mademoiselle’s maid if her mistress could grant him an interview. He gave this curious message, which did not appear to surprise the servant in the least, with an air of the utmost importance. The communication between the father and daughter was always carried on upon this basis; and scoffers wickedly asserted that <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour had modelled it upon a book of etiquette, for the guidance of her household, written by a venerable archduchess.</p>
			<p>Shortly after the man had departed on his errand, a little tap came to the door.</p>
			<p>“Come in,” exclaimed <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour.</p>
			<p>And Mademoiselle Marie ran in and gave her father a kiss upon each cheek. He frowned slightly, and extricated himself from her embrace.</p>
			<p>“I thought it better to come to you, my dear father,” said she, “than to give you the trouble of coming all the way to me.”</p>
			<p>“You always forget that there are certain forms and ceremonies necessary for a young lady of your position.”</p>
			<p>Marie gave a little gentle smile, for she was no stranger to her father’s absurd whims; but she never thwarted them, for she was very fond of him. She was a very charming young lady, and in the description that the Duke had given of her to his son, he had not flattered her at all. Though she differed greatly in appearance from Mademoiselle de Laurebourg, Marie’s beauty was perfect in a style of its own. She was tall and well proportioned, and had all that easy grace of movement, characteristic of women of Southern parentage. Her large soft dark eyes offered a vivid contrast to her creamy complexion; her hair, in utter disregard of the fashionable mode of dressing, was loosely knotted at the back of her head. Her nature was soft and affectionate, capable of the deepest devotion, while she had the most equable temper that can be imagined.</p>
			<p>“Come, my dear papa,” said she; “do not scold me any more. You know that the Marchioness of Arlanges has promised to teach me how to behave myself according to all the rules of fashionable society next winter, and I declare to you that I will so practise them up in secret, that you will be astonished when you behold them.”</p>
			<p>“How womanlike!” muttered her father. “She only scoffs at matters of the most vital importance.”</p>
			<p>He rose from his seat, and, placing his back to the fireplace, took up an imposing position, one hand buried in his waistcoat, and the other ready to gesticulate as occasion required.</p>
			<p>“Oblige me with your deepest attention,” commenced he. “You were eighteen years of age last month, and I have an important piece of intelligence to convey to you. I have had an offer of marriage for you.”</p>
			<p>Marie looked down, and endeavored to hide her confusion at these tidings.</p>
			<p>“Before coming to a conclusion upon a matter of such importance,” continued he, “it was, of course, necessary for me to go into the question most thoroughly. I spared no means of obtaining information, and I am quite certain that the proposed connection would be conducive to your future happiness. The suitor for your hand is but little older than yourself; he is very handsome, very wealthy, and is a Marquis by hereditary right.”</p>
			<p>“Has he spoken to you then?” inquired Marie in tones of extreme agitation.</p>
			<p>“He! Whom do you mean by he?” asked <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour; and as his daughter did not reply, he repeated his question.</p>
			<p>“Who? Why, George de Croisenois.”</p>
			<p>“Pray, what have you to do with Croisenois? Who is he, pray? Not that dandy with a mustache, that I have seen hanging about you this winter?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” faltered Marie; “that is he.”</p>
			<p>“And why should you presume that he had asked me for your hand? Did he tell you that he was going to do so?”</p>
			<p>“Father, I declare⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What, the daughter of a Puymandour has listened to a declaration of love unknown to her father? Ten thousand furies! Has he written to you? Where are those letters?”</p>
			<p>“My dear father⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Silence; have you those letters? Let me see them. Come, no delay; I will have those bits of paper, if I turn the whole house upside down.”</p>
			<p>With a sigh Marie gave the much prized missives to her father; there were four only, fastened together with a morsel of blue ribbon.</p>
			<p>He took one out at random, and read it aloud, with a running fire of oaths and invectives as a commentary upon its contents.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Mademoiselle</span>⁠—</p>
				<p>“Though there is nothing upon earth that I dread so much as your anger, I dare, in spite of your commands to the contrary, to write to you once again. I have learned that you are about to quit Paris for several months. I am twenty-four years of age. I have neither father nor mother, and am entirely my own master. I belong to an ancient and honorable family. My fortune is a large one, and my love for you is of the most honorable and devoted kind. My uncle, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Saumeuse, knows your father well; and will convey my proposals to him upon his return from Italy, in about two or three weeks’ time. Once more intreating you to forgive me,</p>
				<p>“I remain,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Yours respectfully,</p>
					<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:signature">George de Croisenois</span>.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Very pretty indeed,” said <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour, as he replaced the letter in its envelope. “This is sufficient, and I need not read the others; but pray, what answer did you give?”</p>
			<p>“That I must refer him to you, my dear father.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed, on my word, you do me too much honor; and did you really think that I would listen to such proposals? Perhaps you love him?”</p>
			<p>She turned her lovely face towards her father, with the great tears rolling down her cheeks for her sole reply.</p>
			<p>This mute confession, for as such he regarded it, put the finishing touch to <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour’s exasperation.</p>
			<p>“You absolutely love him, and have the impudence to tell me so?”</p>
			<p>Marie glanced at her father, and answered⁠—</p>
			<p>“The Marquis de Croisenois is of good family.”</p>
			<p>“Pooh! you know nothing about it. Why, the first Croisenois was one of Richelieu’s minions, and Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> conferred the title for some shady piece of business which he carried out for him. Has this fine Marquis any means of livelihood?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly; about sixty thousand francs a year.”</p>
			<p>“Humbug! What did he mean by addressing you secretly? Only to compromise your name, and so to secure your fortune, and perhaps to break off your marriage with another.”</p>
			<p>“But why suppose this?”</p>
			<p>“I suppose nothing; I am merely going upon facts. What does a man of honor do when he falls in love?”</p>
			<p>“My dear father⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He goes to his solicitor, acquaints him with his intentions, and explains what his means are; the solicitor goes to the family solicitor of the young lady, and when these men of the law have found out that all is satisfactory, then love is permitted to make his appearance upon the scene. And now you may as well attend to me. Forget De Croisenois as soon as you can, for I have chosen a husband for you, and, having pledged my word of honor, I will abide by it. On Sunday the eligible suitor will be introduced to you, and on Monday we will visit the Bishop, asking him to be good enough to perform the ceremony. On Tuesday you will show yourself in public with him, in order to announce the betrothal. Wednesday the marriage contract will be read. Thursday a grand dinner-party. Friday an exhibition of the marriage presents; Saturday a day of rest; Sunday the publication of the banns, and at the end of the following week the marriage will take place.”</p>
			<p>Mademoiselle Marie listened to her father’s determination with intense horror.</p>
			<p>“For pity’s sake, my dear father, be serious,” cried she.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour paid no attention to her entreaty, but added, as an afterthought:</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you would wish to know the name of the gentleman I have selected as a husband for you. He is the Marquis Norbert, the son and heir of the Duke de Champdoce.”</p>
			<p>Marie turned deadly pale.</p>
			<p>“But I do not know him; I have never seen him,” faltered she.</p>
			<p>“<em>I</em> know him, and that is quite sufficient. I have often told you that you should be a duchess, and I mean to keep my word.”</p>
			<p>Marie’s affection for George de Croisenois was much deeper than she had told her father, much deeper even than she had dared to confess to herself, and she resented this disposal of her with more obstinacy than anyone knowing her gentle nature would have supposed her capable of; but <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour was not the man to give up for an instant the object which he had sworn to attain. He never gave his daughter an instant’s peace, he argued, insisted, and bullied until, after three days’ contest, Marie gave her assent with a flood of tears. The word had scarcely passed her lips, before her father, without even thanking her for her terrible sacrifice, exclaimed in a voice of triumph:</p>
			<p>“I must take these tidings to Champdoce without a moment’s delay.”</p>
			<p>He started at once, and as he passed through the doorway said:</p>
			<p>“Goodbye, my little duchess, goodbye.”</p>
			<p>He was most desirous of seeing the Duke, for, on taking leave of him, the old nobleman had said, “You shall hear from me tomorrow;” but no letter had as yet reached him from Champdoce. This delay however, had suited <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour’s plans, for it had enabled him to wring the consent from his daughter; but now that this had been done, he began to feel very anxious, and to fear that there might be some unforeseen hitch in the affair.</p>
			<p>When he reached Bevron, he saw Daumon talking earnestly with Françoise, the daughter of the Widow Rouleau. <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour bowed graciously, and stopped to talk with the man, for he was just now seeking for popularity, as he was a candidate, and the elections would shortly take place; and, besides, he never failed to talk to persons who exercised any degree of influence, and he knew that Daumon was a most useful man in electioneering.</p>
			<p>“Good morning, Counsellor,” said he gayly. “What is the news today?”</p>
			<p>Daumon bowed profoundly.</p>
			<p>“Bad news, Count,” answered he. “I hear that the Duke de Champdoce is seriously indisposed.”</p>
			<p>“The Duke ill⁠—impossible!”</p>
			<p>“This girl has just given me the information. Tell us all about it, Françoise.”</p>
			<p>“I heard today at the Château that the doctors had quite given him over.”</p>
			<p>“But what is the matter with him?”</p>
			<p>“I did not hear.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour stood perfectly aghast.</p>
			<p>“It is always the way in this world,” Daumon philosophically said. “In the midst of life we are in death!”</p>
			<p>“Good morning, Counsellor,” said De Puymandour; “I must try and find out something more about this.”</p>
			<p>Breathless, and with his mind filled with anxiety, he hurried on.</p>
			<p>All the servants and laborers on the Champdoce estate were gathered together in a group, talking eagerly to each other, and as soon as <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour appeared, one of the servants, disengaging himself from his fellows, came towards him. This was the Duke’s old, trustworthy servant.</p>
			<p>“Well?” exclaimed <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour.</p>
			<p>“Oh, sir,” cried the old man, “this is too horrible; my poor master will certainly die.”</p>
			<p>“But I do not know what is the matter with him; no one has told me anything, in fact.”</p>
			<p>“It was terribly sudden,” answered the man. “It was about this time the day before yesterday that the Duke was alone with <abbr>M.</abbr> Norbert in the dining-room. All at once we heard a great outcry. We ran in and saw my poor master lying senseless on the ground, his face purple and distorted.”</p>
			<p>“He must have had a fit of apoplexy.”</p>
			<p>“Not exactly; the doctor called it a rush of blood to the brain; at least, I think that is what he said, and he added that the reason he did not die on the spot was because in falling he had cut open his head against the oaken sideboard, and the wound bled profusely. We carried him up to his bed; he showed no signs of life, and now⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Well, how is he now?”</p>
			<p>“No one dare give an opinion; my poor master is quite unconscious, and should he recover⁠—and I do not think for a moment that he will⁠—the doctor says his mind will have entirely gone.”</p>
			<p>“Horrible! Too horrible! And a man of such intellectual power, too. I shall not ask you to let me look at him, for I could do no good, and the sight would upset me. But can I not see <abbr>M.</abbr> Norbert?”</p>
			<p>“Pray, do not attempt to do so, sir.”</p>
			<p>“I was his father’s intimate friend, and if the condolences of such a one could assuage the affliction under which⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Impossible!” answered the man in a quick, eager manner. “<abbr>M.</abbr> Norbert was with his father at the time of his seizure, and has given strict orders that he is not to be disturbed on any account; but I must go to him at once, for we are expecting the physicians who are coming from Poitiers.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, then I will go now, but tonight I will send up one of my people for news.”</p>
			<p>With these words, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour walked slowly away, absorbed in thought. The manner and expression of the servant had struck him as extremely strange. He noted the fact that Norbert was alone with his father at the time of the seizure, and, recalling to mind the opposition he had met with from his daughter, he began to imagine that the Duke had found his son rebellious, and that the apoplectic fit had been brought on by a sudden access of passion. Interest and ambition working together brought him singularly near the truth.</p>
			<p>“If the Duke dies, or becomes a maniac,” thought he to himself, “the end as regards us will be the same for Norbert will break off the match to a certainty.”</p>
			<p>He felt that such a proceeding would cause him to be more jeered at and ridiculed than ever, and that the only path of escape left open to him was to marry his daughter to the Marquis de Croisenois, which was a most desirable alliance, in spite of all he had said against it. A voice close to his ear aroused him from his reflections: it was that of Daumon, who had come up unperceived.</p>
			<p>“Was the girl’s information correct, Count?” asked he. “How are the Duke and <abbr>M.</abbr> Norbert, for of course you have seen them both?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>M.</abbr> Norbert is too much agitated by the sad event to see anyone.”</p>
			<p>“Of course that was to be looked for,” returned the wily Counsellor; “for the seizure was terribly sudden.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour was too much occupied with his own thoughts to spare much pity for Norbert. He would have given a great deal to have known what the young man was doing, and especially what he was thinking of at the present moment.</p>
			<p>The poor lad was standing by the bedside of his dying father, watching eagerly for some indication, however slight, of returning life or reason. The hours of horror and self-reproach had entirely changed his feelings and ideas; for it was only at the instant when he saw his father raise the poisoned wine to his lips that he saw his crime in all its hideous enormity. His soul rose up in rebellion against his crime, and the words, “Parricide! murderer!” seemed to ring in his ears like a trumpet call. When his father fell to the ground, his instinct made him shout for aid; but an instant afterwards terror took possession of him, and, rushing from the house, he sought the open country, as though striving to escape from himself.</p>
			<p>Jean, the old servant, who had noticed Norbert’s strange look, was seized with a terrible fear. Trusted as he was by both the Duke and his son, he had many means of knowing all that was going on in the household, and was no stranger to the differences that had arisen recently between father and son. He knew how violent the tempers of both were, and he also knew that some woman was urging on Norbert to a course of open rebellion. He had seen the cruel blow dealt by the Duke, and had wondered greatly when he saw Norbert return to the Château. Why had he done so? He had been in the courtyard when Norbert threw the glass from the window. Putting all these circumstances together, as soon as the inanimate body of the Duke had been laid upon a bed, Jean went into the dining-room, feeling sure that he should make some discovery which would confirm his suspicions. The bottle from which the Duke had filled his glass stood half emptied upon the table. With the greatest care, he poured a few drops of its contents into the hollow of his hand, and tasted it with the utmost caution. The wine still retained its customary taste and scent. Not trusting, however, to this, Jean, after making sure that he was not observed, carried the bottle to his own room, and concealed it. After taking this precaution, he ordered one of the other servants to remain by the side of the Duke until the arrival of the doctor, and then went in search of Norbert.</p>
			<p>For two hours his efforts were fruitless. Giving up his search in despair, he turned once more to regain the Château, and, taking the path through the wood, suddenly perceived a human form stretched on the turf beneath a tree. He moved cautiously towards the figure, and at once recognized Norbert. The faithful servant bent over his young master, and shook him by the arm to arouse him from his state of stupor. At the first touch, Norbert started to his feet with a shriek of terror. With mingled fear and pity, Jean noticed the look that shone in the young man’s eyes, more like that of some hunted animal than a human being.</p>
			<p>“Do not be alarmed, <abbr>M.</abbr> Norbert; it is only I,” said he.</p>
			<p>“And what do you want?”</p>
			<p>“I came to look for you, and to entreat you to come back with me to Champdoce.”</p>
			<p>“Back to Champdoce?” repeated Norbert hoarsely; “no, never!”</p>
			<p>“You must, Master Norbert; for your absence now would cause a terrible scandal. Your place at this critical time is by the bedside of your father.”</p>
			<p>“Never! never!” repeated the poor boy; but he yielded passively when Jean passed his arm through his, and led him away towards the Château. Supported thus by the old man’s arm, he crossed the courtyard, and ascended the staircase; but at his father’s door he withdrew his hand, and struggled to get away.</p>
			<p>“I will not; no, no, I cannot,” gasped he.</p>
			<p>“You must and you shall,” returned the old man firmly. “Whatever your feelings may be, no stain shall rest on the family honor.”</p>
			<p>These words roused Norbert; he stepped across the room, and dropped on his knees by the bed, placing his forehead upon his father’s icy hand. He burst into a passion of tears and sobs, and the simple peasants, who surrounded the couch of the insensible nobleman, breathed a sigh; for, from his pallid face and burning eyes, they believed he must be mad. They were not far out in this surmise; but the tears relieved his overwrought brain, and with this relief came the sense of intense suffering. When the physician arrived, he was able to appear before him merely as a deeply anxious son.</p>
			<p>“There is no hope for the Duke, I regret to say,” said the medical man, who felt that it was useless to keep Norbert in suspense. “There is a feeble chance of saving his life; but even should we succeed in doing so, his intellect will be irretrievably gone. This is a sad truth, but I feel it my duty to inform you of it. I will come again tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>As the doctor left the room, Norbert threw himself into a chair, and clasped his hands round his head, which throbbed until it seemed as if it would burst. For more than half an hour he sat motionless, and then started to his feet with a stifled cry; for he remembered the bottle into which he had poured the poison, and which had been left on the table. Had anyone drunk from it? What had become of it? The agony of his mind gave him the necessary strength to descend to the dining-room; but the bottle was not on the table, nor was it in its customary place in the cupboard. The unhappy boy was looking for it everywhere, when the door silently opened, and Jean appeared on the threshold. The expression upon his young master’s face so startled the faithful old man that he nearly dropped the lighted candle that he carried in his hand.</p>
			<p>“Why are you here, Master Norbert?” asked he in a voice that trembled with emotion.</p>
			<p>“I was looking for⁠—I wanted to find⁠—,” faltered Norbert.</p>
			<p>Jean’s suspicions at once became certainties; he walked up to his young master, and whispered in his ear⁠—</p>
			<p>“You are looking for the Duke’s bottle of wine, are you not? It is quite safe; for I have taken it to my room. Tomorrow the contents shall be emptied away, and there will be no proof existing.”</p>
			<p>Jean spoke in such a low voice that Norbert guessed rather than heard his words, and yet it seemed that the accusing whisper resounded like thunder through the Château, filling the old house from cellar to rooftree.</p>
			<p>“Be quiet,” said he, laying his hand on the old man’s lips, and gazing around him with wild and affrighted glances.</p>
			<p>A more complete confession could hardly have been made.</p>
			<p>“Fear nothing, Master Norbert,” answered Jean; “we are quite alone. I know that there are words which should never be even breathed; and if I have ventured to speak, it was because it was my duty to warn you, and to inculcate on you the necessity of caution.”</p>
			<p>Norbert was filled with horror when he saw that the old man believed him to be really guilty.</p>
			<p>“Jean,” cried he, “you are wrong in your suspicions. I tell you that my father never tasted that wine. I snatched the glass from him before his lips had touched it. I flung it out into the courtyard, and, if you search, you will find its scattered fragments there still.”</p>
			<p>“I am not sitting in judgment upon you; what you tell me to believe I am ready to accept.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” cried Norbert passionately, “he does not believe me; he thinks that I am guilty. I swear to you by all that I hold most sacred in this world, that I am innocent of this deed.”</p>
			<p>The attached servant shook his head with a melancholy air.</p>
			<p>“Of course, of course,” said he; “but it is for us two to save the honor of the house of Champdoce. Should it happen that any suspicions should be aroused, put all the guilt upon my shoulders. I will defend myself in a manner which will only fix the crime more firmly upon me. I will not throw away the bottle, but will retain it in my room, so that it may be found there, and its contents will be a damnatory evidence against me. What matters it how a poor man like me is sent out of the world? but with you it is different. You⁠—”</p>
			<p>Norbert wrung his hands in abject despair; the sublime devotion of the old servant showed how firmly Jean believed in his criminality. He was about to assert his innocence further, when the loud sound of a closing door was heard above stairs.</p>
			<p>“Hush!” said the old man; “someone approaches; we must not be seen whispering together like two plotters, for their suspicions would be certainly awakened; and I fear that my face or your eyes will reveal the secret. Quick, go upstairs, and endeavor, as soon as possible, to resume your calmness. I beg you not to compromise the honor of your name, which is in deadly peril.”</p>
			<p>Without another word Norbert obeyed. His father was alone, and only the man to whom Jean had delegated the task of watcher remained by his bedside. At the sight of his young master he rose.</p>
			<p>“The prescription which the doctor ordered to be made up has arrived,” said he. “I have administered a dose to the Duke, and it seems to me that the result has been favorable.”</p>
			<p>Norbert drew up a heavy armchair to the foot of the bed, and took his seat upon it. From this position he could see his father’s face. His brain was dazed, and it was with the utmost difficulty that he could recall the chain of events which had drawn him towards the abyss into which he had so nearly been precipitated.</p>
			<p>The veil had been taken from his eyes, and he now saw with perfect clearness and seemed again to hear his father’s voice as it roughly warned him that the woman he loved was a mere plotter, who cared not for him, but was scheming for his fortune and his name. Then he had been furiously indignant and looked upon the words as almost blasphemous, but now he saw that his father was right. How was it that he had not before seen that Diana was flinging herself in his way, and that all her affected openness and simplicity were merely the perfections of art, and that step by step she had led him to the brink of the terrible precipice which yawned before him? The whole hideous part as played by Daumon was no longer a sealed book to him. She whom he had looked on as a pure and innocent girl was merely the accomplice of a scheming villain like the Counsellor, and after exciting his hatred and anger almost to madness, had placed the poison which was to take his father’s life in his hands. A cold shiver ran through him as he realized this, and all his ardent love for Diana de Laurebourg was changed into a feeling of loathing and disgust.</p>
			<p>At last the first pale rays of dawn broke through the casement, but before that Norbert, worn out with conflicting emotions, had fallen into a restless and uneasy sleep, and when he awoke the doctor was standing by the bedside of the sick man. At the first sound made by Norbert as he stirred in the chair, the doctor came towards him, saying, “We shall preserve his life.”</p>
			<p>This prognostication was complete, for that very evening the Duke de Champdoce was able to move in his bed, the next day he uttered some incoherent words, and later on asked for food; but the will of iron had passed away, the features had lost their expression of determination, and the eye the glitter of pride and power. Never again would the Duke be able to exert that keen, stern intellect which had enabled him to influence all those around him; and in this terrible state of imbecility the haughty nobleman would ever remain, fed and looked after like a child, with no thought beyond his desires and his warm fire, and without a care for anything that was going on in the world around him.</p>
			<p>After the enormity of his crime had been brought before him, the greatness of the punishment that he must endure now came across Norbert’s mind. It was only now that Jean had ventured to tell him of <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour’s visit; and such a change had taken place in Norbert that he looked upon this visit as a special arrangement made by Providence.</p>
			<p>“My father’s will shall be carried out in every respect,” said he to himself, and without an hour’s delay he wrote to <abbr>M.</abbr> de Puymandour, begging him to call, and hoping that the grief which had fallen upon him had in no way altered the plan which had already been arranged.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
