<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>.</h2>
			<h3>AN UNLUCKY BLOW.</h3>
			<p>The falling of a thunderbolt at his feet would have startled Norbert less than these words did. The Duke took, or affected to take, no notice of his son’s extreme agitation, and in a careless manner he continued⁠—</p>
			<p>“I suppose, my son, that it is hardly necessary for me to tell you the young lady’s name. Mademoiselle Marie de Puymandour cannot fail to please you. She is excessively pretty, tall, dark, and with a fine figure. You saw her at Mass one day. What do you think of her?”</p>
			<p>“Think!” stammered Norbert. “Really I⁠⸺”</p>
			<p>“Pshaw,” replied the old gentleman; “I thought that you had begun to use your eyes. And look here, Marquis, you must adopt a different style of dress. You can go over with me to Poitiers tomorrow, and one of the tailors there will make you some clothes suitable to your rank, for I don’t suppose that you wish to alarm your future wife by the uncouthness of your appearance.”</p>
			<p>“But, father⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Wait a moment, if you please. I shall have a suite of apartments reserved for you and your bride, and you can pass your honeymoon here. Take care you do not prolong it for too lengthened a period; and when it is all over, we can break the young woman into all our ways.”</p>
			<p>“But,” interrupted Norbert hastily, “suppose I do not fancy this young lady?”</p>
			<p>“Well, what then?”</p>
			<p>“Suppose I should beg you to save me from a marriage which will render me most unhappy?”</p>
			<p>The Duke shrugged his shoulders. “Why this is mere childishness,” said he. “The marriage is a most suitable one, and it is my desire that it should take place.”</p>
			<p>“But, father,” again commenced Norbert.</p>
			<p>“What! Are you opposing my will?” asked his father angrily. “Pray, do you hesitate?”</p>
			<p>“No,” answered his son coldly, “I do not hesitate.”</p>
			<p>“Very good, then. A man of no position can consult the dictates of his heart when he takes a wife, but with a nobleman of rank and station it is certainly a different matter, for with the latter, marriage should be looked upon as a mere business transaction. I have made excellent arrangements. Let me repeat to you the conditions. The Count will give two-thirds of his fortune, which is estimated at five millions⁠—just think of that!⁠—and when we get that, we shall be able to screw and save with better heart. Think of the restoration of our house, and the colossal fortune that our descendants will one day inherit, and realize all the beauties of a life of self-denial.”</p>
			<p>While the Duke was uttering this string of incoherent sentences, he was pacing up and down the room, and now he halted immediately in front of his son. “You understand,” said he; “tomorrow you will go to Poitiers, and on Sunday we will dine at the house of your future father-in-law.”</p>
			<p>In this fearful crisis Norbert did not know what to say or how to act.</p>
			<p>“Father,” he once more commenced, “I have no wish to go to Poitiers tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“What are you saying? What in heaven’s name do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“I mean that as I shall never love Mademoiselle de Puymandour, she will never be my wife.”</p>
			<p>The Duke had never foreseen the chance of rebellion on the part of his son, and he could not bring his mind to receive such an unlooked-for event.</p>
			<p>“You are mad,” said he at last, “and do not know what you are saying.”</p>
			<p>“I know very well.”</p>
			<p>“Think of what you are doing.”</p>
			<p>“I have reflected.”</p>
			<p>The Duke was making a violent effort to compose his ordinarily violent temper.</p>
			<p>“Do you imagine,” answered he disdainfully, “that I shall be satisfied with an answer of this kind? I hope that you will submit to my wishes, for I think that, as the head of the family, I have conceived a splendid plan for its future aggrandizement; and do you think that, for the mere whim of a boy, I will be turned aside from my fixed determination?”</p>
			<p>“No, father,” answered Norbert, “it is no boyish whim that makes me oppose your wishes. Tell me, have I not ever been a dutiful son to you? Have I ever refused to do what I was ordered? No; I have obeyed you implicitly. I am the son of the wealthiest man in Poitiers, and I have lived like a laborer’s child. Whatever your mandates were, I have never complained or murmured at them.”</p>
			<p>“Well, and now I order you to marry Mademoiselle de Puymandour.”</p>
			<p>“Anything but that; I do not love her, and I shall never do so. Do you wish my whole life to be blighted? I entreat you to spare me this sacrifice!”</p>
			<p>“My orders are given, and you must comply with them.”</p>
			<p>“No,” answered Norbert quietly, “I will not comply with them.”</p>
			<p>A purple flush passed across the Duke’s face, then it faded away, leaving every feature of a livid whiteness.</p>
			<p>“Great heavens!” said he in a voice before which Norbert, at one time, would have quailed. “Whence comes the audacity that makes you venture to dispute my orders?”</p>
			<p>“From the feeling that I am acting rightly.”</p>
			<p>“How long is it that it has been right for children to disobey their parents’ commands?”</p>
			<p>“Ever since parents began to issue unjust commands.”</p>
			<p>This speech put the finishing stroke to the Duke’s rage. He made a step across the room, towards his son, raising the stick that he usually carried high in the air. For a moment he stood thus, and then, casting it aside, he exclaimed⁠—</p>
			<p>“No, I cannot strike a Champdoce.”</p>
			<p>Perhaps it was Norbert’s intrepid attitude that restrained the Duke’s frenzy, for he had not moved a muscle, but stood still, with his arms folded, and his head thrown haughtily back.</p>
			<p>“No, this is an act of disobedience that I will not put up with,” exclaimed the old man in a voice of thunder, and, springing upon his son, he grasped him by the collar and dragged him up to a room on the second floor, and thrust him violently through the doorway.</p>
			<p>“You have twenty-four hours in which to reflect whether you will be willing to accept the wife that I have chosen for you,” said he.</p>
			<p>“I have already decided on that point,” answered Norbert quietly.</p>
			<p>The Duke made no reply, but slammed the door, which was of massive oak, and secured by a lock of enormous proportions.</p>
			<p>Norbert gazed round; the only other exit from the room was by means of a window some forty feet from the ground. The young man, however, imagined that someone would surely come to make up his bed for the night; that would give him two sheets; these he could knot together and thus secure a means of escape. He might not be able to see Diana at once, but he could easily send her a message by Daumon, warning her of what had taken place. Having arranged his plans, he threw himself into an armchair with a more easy mind than he had experienced for many months past. The decisive step had been taken, and the relations between his father and himself clearly defined, and thus he naturally considered great progress had been made, and the task before him seemed as nothing to what he had already performed.</p>
			<p>“My father,” thought he, “must be half mad with passion.”</p>
			<p>And Norbert was not wrong in his opinion. When the Duke, as usual, took his place at the table, at which the farm laborers ate their meals, not one of them had the courage to make a single observation. Everyone knew what a serious altercation had taken place between father and son, and each one was devoured by the pangs of ungratified curiosity.</p>
			<p>As soon as the meal was concluded, the Duke called an old and trustworthy servant, who had been in his employment for over thirty years.</p>
			<p>“Jean,” said he, “your young master is locked in the yellow room. Here is the key. Take him something to eat.”</p>
			<p>“Very good, your Grace.”</p>
			<p>“Wait a little. You will spend the night in his room and keep a strict watch upon him. He may design to make his escape. If he attempts it, restrain him, if necessary, by physical force. Should he prove too strong for you, call to me; I shall be near, and will come to your aid.”</p>
			<p>This unexpected precaution upon the Duke’s part upset all Norbert’s plans of escape. He endeavored to persuade Jean to allow him to go out for a couple of hours, giving his word of honor that he would return at the expiration of that time. Prayers and menaces, however, had no effect. Had the young man gazed from the window, he would have seen his father striding moodily up and down the courtyard, with the thought gnawing at his heart that perhaps after all these many years of waiting his plans might yet be frustrated.</p>
			<p>“There is a woman at the bottom of all this,” said he to himself. “It is only woman’s wiles that in this brief space of time would effect so complete a change in a young man’s disposition. Besides, he would not have so obstinately declined to listen to the proposal I made him had not his affections been engaged elsewhere. Who can she be? and by what means shall I find her out?”</p>
			<p>It would be absurd to question Norbert, and the Duke was excessively unwilling to institute any regular inquiry into the matter. He passed the whole night in gloomy indecision, but towards morning an inspiration came to him which he looked upon as a special interposition of Providence.</p>
			<p>“Bruno,” he exclaimed with a mighty oath. “The dog will show me the place that his master frequents and perhaps lead me to the very woman who had bewitched him.”</p>
			<p>The brilliant idea soothed him a great deal, and at one o’clock he took his seat as usual at the head of the table, and ordered food to be taken up to Norbert, but that none of the measures for his safe custody were to be relaxed.</p>
			<p>When he thought the moment was a favorable one, he whistled to Bruno, and, though the dog rarely followed him, yet in the absence of his master, he condescended to accompany the Duke down the avenue to the front gates. Three roads branched off from here, but the dog did not hesitate for a moment, and took the one to the left, like an animal who knew his destination perfectly well. Bruno went ahead for nearly half an hour, until he reached the exact spot where Diana had met with her accident. He made a cast round, but finding nothing, sat down, clearly saying⁠—</p>
			<p>“Let us wait.”</p>
			<p>“This, then,” muttered the Duke, “is the place where the lovers have been in the habit of meeting each other.”</p>
			<p>The place was a very lonely one, and, standing on the rising ground, commanded a view of the country for a long way round.</p>
			<p>The Duke noticed this, and took up a position where the trunk of a giant oak almost concealed him from observation. He was delighted at his sagacity, and was almost in a good humor; for now that he had reflected, the danger did not seem by any means so great, for to whom could Norbert have lost his heart? To some little peasant girl, perhaps, who, thinking that the lad was an easy dupe, had tried to induce him to marry her. As these thoughts passed through the Duke’s brain, Bruno gave a joyous bark.</p>
			<p>“Here she is,’ muttered he, as he emerged from his hiding place, and at that moment Diana de Laurebourg made her appearance; but as soon as she saw the Duke she uttered a faint cry of alarm. She was inclined to turn and fly, but her strength failed her, and, extending her hands, she grasped the boughs of a slender birch tree that grew close by, to prevent herself from falling. The Duke was quite as much astonished as the young lady. He had expected to see a peasant girl, and here was the daughter of the Marquis de Laurebourg. But anger soon succeeded to surprise; for though he might have had nothing to fear from the peasant, the daughter of the Marquis de Laurebourg was an utterly different antagonist. He could not rely upon aid from her family, as, for all he knew, they might be aiding and abetting her.</p>
			<p>“Well, my child,” began he, “you do not seem very glad to see me.”</p>
			<p>“Your Grace.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, when you come out to meet the son, it is annoying to meet the father; but do not blame poor Norbert, for I assure you he is not in fault.”</p>
			<p>Though Mademoiselle de Laurebourg had been startled at first, she was possessed of too strong a will to give in, and soon recovered her self-possession.</p>
			<p>She never thought to screen herself by a denial of her reasons for being on the spot, for such a course she would have looked on as an act of treacherous cowardice.</p>
			<p>“You are quite right,” answered she. “I came here to meet your son, and therefore you will pardon me if I take my leave of you.”</p>
			<p>With a deep courtesy she was about to move away, when the Duke laid a restraining grip upon her arm.</p>
			<p>“Permit me, my child,” said he, endeavoring to put on a kind and paternal tone⁠—“let me say a few words to you. Do you know why Norbert did not come to meet you?”</p>
			<p>“He has doubtless some very good reason.”</p>
			<p>“My son is locked up in a room, and my servants have my orders to prevent his making his escape by force, if necessary.”</p>
			<p>“Poor fellow! He deserves the deepest commiseration.”</p>
			<p>The Duke was much surprised at this piece of impertinence, as he considered it.</p>
			<p>“I will tell you,” returned he in tones of rising anger, “how it comes that I treat my son, the heir to my rank and fortune, in this manner.”</p>
			<p>He looked savagely angry as he spoke, but Diana answered negligently, “Pray go on; you quite interest me.”</p>
			<p>“Well then, listen to me. I have chosen a wife for Norbert; she is as young as you are⁠—beautiful, clever, and wealthy.”</p>
			<p>“And of noble birth, of course.”</p>
			<p>The sarcasm conveyed in this reply roused the Duke to fury.</p>
			<p>“Fifteen hundred thousand francs as a marriage portion will outweigh a coat of arms, even though it should be a tower argent on a field azure.” The Duke paused as he made this allusion to the Laurebourg arms, and then continued, “In addition to this, she has great expectations; and yet my son is mad enough to refuse the hand of this wealthy heiress.”</p>
			<p>“If you think that this marriage will cause your son’s happiness, you are quite right in acting as you have done.”</p>
			<p>“Happiness! What has that to do with the matter, as long as it adds to the aggrandizement of our house and name? I have made up my mind that Norbert shall marry this girl; I have sworn it, and I never break my oath. I told him this myself.”</p>
			<p>Diana suffered acutely, but her pride supported her, whilst her confidence in Norbert was so great that she had the boldness to inquire, “And what did he say to that?”</p>
			<p>“Norbert will become a dutiful son once more when he is removed from the malignant influence which has been so injurious to him,” returned the Duke fiercely.</p>
			<p>“Indeed.”</p>
			<p>“He will obey me, when I show him that though he may not value his name and position, there are others who do so; and that many a woman would fight a brave battle for the honor of being the Duchess of Champdoce. Young lady, my son is a mere boy; but I have known the world, and when I prove to the poor fool that it was only grasping ambition which assumed the garb of love, he will renounce his folly and resume his allegiance to me. I will tell him what I think of the poverty-stricken adventuresses of high birth, whose only weapons are their youth and beauty, and with which they think that they can win a wealthy husband in the battle of life.”</p>
			<p>“Continue, sir,” broke in Diana haughtily. “Insult a defenceless girl with her poverty! It is a noble act, and one worthy of a highborn gentleman like yourself!”</p>
			<p>“I believed,” said the Duke, “that I was addressing the woman whose advice had led my son to break into open rebellion against my authority. Am I right or wrong? You can prove me to be mistaken by urging upon Norbert the necessity for submission.”</p>
			<p>She made no reply, but bent her head upon her bosom.</p>
			<p>“You see,” continued the Duke, “that I am correct, and that if you continue to act as you have done, I shall be justified in retaliating in any manner that I may deem fit. You have now been warned. Carry on this intrigue at your peril.”</p>
			<p>He placed such an insulting emphasis upon the word “intrigue” that Diana’s anger rose to boiling point. At that instant, for the sake of vengeance, she would have risked her honor, her ambition, her very life itself.</p>
			<p>Forgetting all prudence, she cast aside her mask of affected indifference, and, with her eyes flashing angry gleams of fire, and her cheeks burning, she said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Listen to me. I, too, have sworn an oath, and it is that Norbert shall be my husband; and I tell you that he shall be so! Shut him up in prison, subject him to every indignity at the hands of your menials, but you will never break his spirit, or make him go back from his plighted word. If I bid him, he will resist your will even unto the bitter end. He and I will never yield. Believe me when I tell you, that before you attack a young girl’s honor, you had better pause; for one day she will be a member of your family. Farewell.”</p>
			<p>Before the Duke could recover his senses, Diana was far down the path on her way homewards; and then he burst into a wild storm of menaces, oaths, and insults. He fancied that he was alone, but he was mistaken; for the whole of that strange scene had a hidden witness, and that witness was Daumon. He had heard of the treatment of the young Marquis from one of his servants at the Château, and his first thought had been to acquaint Diana with it. Unfortunately he saw no means of doing this. He dared not go to Laurebourg, and he would have died sooner than put pen to paper. He was in a position of the deepest embarrassment when the idea struck him of going to the lovers’ trysting place. The little cry that Diana had uttered upon perceiving the Duke had put him upon his guard. Bruno had found him out; but, as he knew him, merely fawned upon him. He was delighted at the fury of the Duke, whom he hated with cold and steady malignity; but the courage of Diana filled him with admiration. Her sublime audacity won his warmest praises, and he longed for her as an ally to aid him in his scheme of revenge. He knew that the girl would find herself in a terribly embarrassing position, and thus she would be sure to call upon him for advice before returning home.</p>
			<p>“Now,” thought he, “if I wish to profit by her anger, I ought to strike while the iron is hot; and to do so, I should be at home to meet her.”</p>
			<p>Without a moment’s delay, he dashed through the woods, striving to get home without the young girl’s perceiving him. His movements in the underwood caught the Duke’s eye.</p>
			<p>“Who is there?” exclaimed he, moving towards the spot from whence the rustling came. There was no reply. Surely he had not been mistaken. Calling to Bruno, he strove to put him on the scent, but the dog showed no signs of eagerness. He sniffed about for a time, and seemed to linger near one special spot. The Duke moved towards it, and distinctly saw the impression of two knees upon the grass.</p>
			<p>“Someone has been eavesdropping,” muttered he, much enraged at his discovery. “Who can it be? Has Norbert escaped from his prison?”</p>
			<p>As he returned through the courtyard, he called one of the grooms to him.</p>
			<p>“Where is my son?” asked he.</p>
			<p>“Upstairs, your Grace,” was the answer.</p>
			<p>The Duke breathed more freely. Norbert was still in security, and therefore could not have been the person who had been listening.</p>
			<p>“But,” added the lad, “the young master is half frantic.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Well, he declared that he would not remain in his room an instant longer; so old Jean called for help. He is awfully strong, and it took six of us to hold him. He said that if we would let him go, he would return in two hours, and that his honor and life were involved.”</p>
			<p>The Duke listened with a sarcastic smile. He cared nothing about the frantic struggles of his son, for his heart had grown cold and hard from the presence of the fixed idea which had actuated his conduct for so many years, and it was with the solemn face of a man who was fulfilling a sacred duty that he ascended to the room in which his son was imprisoned. Jean threw open the door, and the Duke paused for a moment on the threshold. The furniture had been overturned, some of it broken, and there were evident signs of a furious struggle having taken place.</p>
			<p>A powerful laborer stood near the window, and Norbert was lying on the bed, with his face turned to the wall.</p>
			<p>“Leave us,” said the Duke, and the man withdrew at once.</p>
			<p>“Get up, Norbert,” he added; “I wish to speak to you.”</p>
			<p>His son obeyed him. Anyone but the Duke would have been alarmed by the expression of the young man’s face.</p>
			<p>“What is the meaning of all this?” asked the old nobleman in his most severe voice. “Are not my orders sufficient to insure obedience? I hear that absolute force has had to be used towards you during my absence. Tell me, my son, what plans you have devised during these hours of solitude, and what hopes you still venture to cherish.”</p>
			<p>“I intend to be free, and I will be so.”</p>
			<p>The Duke affected not to hear the reply, uttered as it was in a tone of derision.</p>
			<p>“It was very easy for me to discover, from your obstinacy, that some woman had endeavored to entrap you, and by her insidious counsels inducing you to disobey your best friend.”</p>
			<p>He paused, but there was no reply.</p>
			<p>“This woman⁠—this dangerous woman⁠—I have been in search of, and as you can conceive, I easily found her. I went to the Forest of Bevron, and there I need not tell you I found Mademoiselle de Laurebourg.”</p>
			<p>“Did you speak to her?”</p>
			<p>“I did so, certainly. I told her my opinion of those manoeuvring women who fascinate the dupes they intend to take advantage of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Father!”</p>
			<p>“Can it be possible that you, simple boy even as you are, could have been deceived by the pretended love of this wily young woman? It is not you, Marquis, that she loves, but our name and fortune; but <i>I</i> know if <i>she</i> does not that the law will imprison women who contrive to entrap young men who are under age.”</p>
			<p>Norbert turned deadly pale.</p>
			<p>“Did you really say that to her?” asked he, in a low, hoarse voice, utterly unlike his own. “You dare to insult the woman I love, when you knew that I was far away and unable to protect her! Take care, or I shall forget that you are my father.”</p>
			<p>“He actually threatens me,” said the Duke, “my son threatens me;” and, raising the heavy stick he held in his hand, he struck Norbert a violent blow. By a fortunate movement the unhappy boy drew back, and so avoided the full force of the stroke, but the end of the stick struck him across the temple, inflicting a long though not a serious wound. In his blind rage Norbert was about to throw himself upon his father, when his eyes caught sight of the open door. Liberty and safety lay before him, and, with a bound, he was on the stairs, and before the Duke could shout for aid from the window, his son was tearing across the park with all the appearance and gesture of a madman.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
