<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12: A Startling Revelation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">A Startling Revelation</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>When Sabine de Mussidan told her lover that she would appeal to the generosity of <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay, she had not calculated on the necessity she would have for endurance, but had rather listened to the dictates of her heart; and this fact came the more strongly before her, when in the solitude of her own chamber, she inquired of herself how she was to carry out her promise. It seemed to her very terrible to have to lay bare the secrets of her soul to anyone, but the more so to <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay, who had asked for her hand in marriage. She uttered no word on her way home, where she arrived just in time to take her place at the dinner table, and never was a more dismal company assembled for the evening meal. Her own miseries occupied Sabine, and her father and mother were suffering from their interviews with Mascarin and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise. What did the liveried servants, who waited at table with such an affectation of interest, care for the sorrows of their master or mistress? They were well lodged and well fed, and nothing save their wages did they care for. By nine o’clock Sabine was in her own room trying to grow accustomed to the thoughts of an interview with <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay. She hardly closed her eyes all night, and felt worn out and dispirited by musing; but she never thought of evading the promise she had made to André, or of putting it off for a time. She had vowed to lose no time, and her lover was eagerly awaiting a letter from her, telling him of the result. In the perplexity in which she found herself, she could not confide in either father or mother, for she felt that a cloud hung over both their lives, though she knew not what it was. When she left the convent where she had been educated, and returned home, she felt that she was in the way, and that the day of her marriage would be one of liberation to her parents from their cares and responsibilities. All this prayed terribly upon her mind, and might have driven a less pure-minded girl to desperate measures. It seemed to her that it would be less painful to fly from her father’s house than to have this interview with <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay. Luckily for her, frail as she looked, she possessed an indomitable will, and this carried her through most of her difficulties.</p>
				<p>For André’s sake, as well as her own, she did not wish to violate any of the unwritten canons of society, but she longed for the hour to come when she could acknowledge her love openly to the world. At one moment she thought of writing a letter, but dismissed the thought as the height of folly. As the time passed Sabine began to reproach herself for her cowardice. All at once she heard the clang of the opening of the main gates. Peeping from her window, she saw a carriage drive up, and, to her inexpressible delight, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay alighted from it.</p>
				<p>“Heaven has heard my prayer, and sent him to me,” murmured she.</p>
				<p>“What do you intend to do, Mademoiselle?” asked the devoted Modeste; “will you speak to him now?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I will. My mother is still in her dressing-room, and no one will venture to disturb my father in the library. If I meet <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay in the hall and take him into the drawing-room, I shall have time for a quarter of an hour’s talk, and that will be sufficient.”</p>
				<p>Calling up all her courage, she left her room on her errand. Had André seen the man selected by the Count de Mussidan for his daughter’s husband, he might well have been proud of her preference for him. <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay was one of the best known men in Paris, and fortune had showered all her blessings on his head. He was not forty, of an extremely aristocratic appearance, highly educated, and witty; and, in addition, one of the largest landholders in the country. He had always refused to enter public life. “For,” he would say to those who spoke to him on the matter, “I have enough to spend my money on without making myself ridiculous.” He was a perfect type of what a French gentleman should be⁠—courteous, of unblemished reputation, and full of chivalrous devotion and generosity. He was, it is said, a great favorite with the fair sex; but, if report spoke truly, his discretion was as great as his success. He had not always been wealthy, and there was a mysterious romance in his life. When he was only twenty, he had sailed for South America, where he remained twelve years, and returned no richer than he was before; but shortly afterward his aged uncle, the Marquis de Faverlay, died bequeathing his immense fortune to his nephew on the condition that he should add the name of Faverlay to that of De Breulh. De Breulh was passionately fond of horses; but he was really a lover of them, and not a mere turfite, and this was all that the world knew of the man who held in his hands the fates of Sabine de Mussidan and André. As soon as he caught sight of Sabine he made a profound inclination.</p>
				<p>The girl came straight up to him.</p>
				<p>“Sir,” said she, in a voice broken by conflicting emotions, “may I request the pleasure of a short private conversation with you?”</p>
				<p>“Mademoiselle,” answered De Breulh, concealing his surprise beneath another bow, “I am at your disposal.”</p>
				<p>One of the footmen, at a word from Sabine, threw open the door of the drawing-room in which the Countess had thrown down her arms in her duel with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise. Sabine did not ask her visitor to be seated, but leaning her elbow on the marble mantelpiece, she said, after a silence equally trying to both⁠—</p>
				<p>“This strange conduct on my part, sir, will show you, more than any explanation, my sincerity, and the perfect confidence with which you have inspired me.”</p>
				<p>She paused, but De Breulh made no reply, for he was perfectly mystified.</p>
				<p>“You are,” she continued, “my parents’ intimate friend, and must have seen the discomforts of our domestic hearth, and that though both my father and mother are living, I am as desolate as the veriest orphan.”</p>
				<p>Fearing that <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh might not understand her reason for speaking thus, she threw a shade of haughtiness into her manner as she resumed⁠—</p>
				<p>“My reason, sir, for seeing you today is to ask⁠—nay, to entreat you, to release me from my engagement to you, and to take the whole responsibility of the rupture on yourself.”</p>
				<p>Man of the world as he was, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh could not conceal his surprise, in which a certain amount of wounded self-love was mingled.</p>
				<p>“Mademoiselle!” commenced he⁠—</p>
				<p>Sabine interrupted him.</p>
				<p>“I am asking a great favor, and your granting it will spare me many hours of grief and sadness, and,” she added, as a faint smile flickered across her pallid features, “I am aware that I am asking but a trifling sacrifice on your part. You know scarcely anything of me, and therefore you can only feel indifference toward me.”</p>
				<p>“You are mistaken,” replied the young man gravely; “and you do not judge me rightly. I am not a mere boy, and always consider a step before I take it; and if I asked for your hand, it was because I had learned to appreciate the greatness both of your heart and intellect; and I believe that if you would condescend to accept me, we could be very happy together.”</p>
				<p>The girl seemed about to speak, but De Breulh continued⁠—</p>
				<p>“It seems, however, that I have in some way displeased you⁠—I do not know how; but, believe me, it will be a source of sorrow to me for the rest of my life.”</p>
				<p>De Breulh’s sincerity was so evident, that Mademoiselle de Mussidan was deeply affected.</p>
				<p>“You have not displeased me in any way,” answered she softly, “and are far too good for me. To have become your wife would have made me a proud and happy woman.”</p>
				<p>Here she stopped, almost choked by her tears, but <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh wished to fathom this mystery.</p>
				<p>“Why then this resolve?” asked he.</p>
				<p>“Because,” replied Sabine faintly, as she hid her face⁠—“because I have given all my love to another.”</p>
				<p>The young man uttered an exclamation so full of angry surprise, that Sabine turned upon him at once.</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir,” answered she, “to another; one utterly unknown to my parents, yet one who is inexpressibly dear to me. This ought not to irritate you, for I gave him my love long before I met you. Besides, you have every advantage over him. He is at the foot, while you are at the summit, of the social ladder. You are of aristocratic lineage⁠—he is one of the people. You have a noble name⁠—he does not even know his own. Your wealth is enormous⁠—while he works hard for his daily bread. He has all the fire of genius, but the cruel cares of life drag and fetter him to the earth. He carries on a workman’s trade to supply funds to study his beloved art.”</p>
				<p>Incautiously, Sabine had chosen the very means to wound this noble gentleman most cruelly, for her whole beauty blazed out as, inflamed by her passion, she spoke so eloquently of André and drew such a parallel between the two young men.</p>
				<p>“Now, sir,” said she, “do you comprehend me? I know the terrible social abyss which divides me from the man I love, and the future may hold in store some terrible punishment for my fidelity to him, but no one shall ever hear a word of complaint from my lips, for⁠—” she hesitated, and then uttered these simple words⁠—“for I love him.”</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh listened with an outwardly impassible face, but the venomed tooth of jealousy was gnawing at his heart. He had not told Sabine the entire truth, for he had studied her for a long time, and his love had grown firm and strong. Without an unkind thought the girl had shattered the edifice which he had built up with such care and pain. He would have given his name, rank, and title to have been in this unknown lover’s place, who, though he worked for his bread, and had no grand ancestral name, was yet so fondly loved. Many a man in his position would have shrugged his shoulders and coldly sneered at the words, “I love him,” but he did not, for his nature was sufficiently noble to sympathize with hers. He admired her courage and frankness, which disdaining all subterfuges, went straight and unhesitatingly to the point she desired to reach. She might be imprudent and reckless, but in his eyes these seemed hardly to be faults, for it is seldom that convent-bred young ladies err in this way.</p>
				<p>“But this man,” said he, after a long pause⁠—“how do you manage ever to see him?”</p>
				<p>“I meet him out walking,” replied she, “and I sometimes go to his studio.”</p>
				<p>“To his studio?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I have sat to him several times for my portrait; but I have never done anything that I need blush to own. You know all now, sir,” continued Sabine; “and it has been very hard for a young girl like me to say all this to you. It is a thing that ought to be confided to my mother.”</p>
				<p>Only those who have heard a woman that they are ardently attached to say, “I do not love you,” can picture <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh’s frame of mind. Had anyone else than Sabine made this communication he would not have withdrawn, but would have contested the prize with his more fortunate rival. But now that Mademoiselle de Mussidan had, as it were, thrown herself upon his mercy, he could not bring himself to take advantage of her confidence.</p>
				<p>“It shall be as you desire,” said he, with a faint tinge of bitterness in his tone. “Tonight I will write to your father, and withdraw my demand for your hand. It is the first time that I have ever gone back from my word; and I am sure that your father will be highly indignant.”</p>
				<p>Sabine’s strength and firmness had now entirely deserted her. “From the depth of my soul, sir,” said she, “I thank you; for by this act of generosity I shall avoid a contest that I dreaded.”</p>
				<p>“Unfortunately,” broke in De Breulh, “you do not see how useless to you will be the sacrifice that you exact from me. Listen! you have not appeared much in society; and when you did, it was in the character of my betrothed; as soon as I withdraw hosts of aspirants for your hand will spring up.”</p>
				<p>Sabine heaved a deep sigh, for André had foreseen the same result.</p>
				<p>“Then,” continued De Breulh, “your situation will become even a more trying one; for if your noble qualities are not enough to excite admiration in the bosoms of the other sex, your immense wealth will arouse the cupidity of the fortune-hunters.”</p>
				<p>When De Breulh referred to fortune-hunters, was this a side blow at André? With this thought rushing through her brain, she gazed upon him eagerly, but read no meaning in his eyes.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” answered she dreamily, “it is true that I am very wealthy.”</p>
				<p>“And what will be your reply to the next suitor, and to the one after that?” asked De Breulh.</p>
				<p>“I know not; but I shall find some loophole of escape when the time comes; for if I act in obedience to the dictates of my heart and conscience, I cannot do wrong, for Heaven will come to my aid.”</p>
				<p>The phrase sounded like a dismissal; but De Breulh, man of the world as he was, did not accept it.</p>
				<p>“May I permit myself to offer you a word of advice?”</p>
				<p>“Do so, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Very well, then; why not permit matters to remain as they now are? So long as our rupture is not public property, so long will you be left in peace. It would be the simplest thing in the world to postpone all decisive steps for a twelvemonth, and I would withdraw as soon as you notified me that it was time.”</p>
				<p>Sabine put every confidence in this proposal, believing that everything was in good faith. “But,” said she, “such a subterfuge would be unworthy of us all.”</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh did not urge this point; a feeling of deep sympathy had succeeded to his wounded pride; and, with all the chivalrous instinct of his race, he determined to do his best to assist these lovers.</p>
				<p>“Might I be permitted,” asked he, “now that you have placed so much confidence in me, to make the acquaintance of the man whom you have honored with your love?”</p>
				<p>Sabine colored deeply. “I have no reason to conceal anything from you: his name is André, he is a painter, and lives in the Rue de la Tour d’Auvergne.”</p>
				<p>De Breulh made a mental note of the name, and continued⁠—</p>
				<p>“Do not think that I ask this question from mere idle curiosity; my only desire is to aid you. I should be glad to be a something in your life. I have influential friends and connections⁠—”</p>
				<p>Sabine was deeply wounded. Did this man propose patronizing André, and thus place his position and wealth in contrast with that of the obscure painter? In his eagerness de Breulh had made a false move.</p>
				<p>“I thank you,” answered she coldly; “but André is very proud, and any offer of assistance would wound him deeply. Forgive my scruples, which are perhaps exaggerated and absurd. All he has of his own are his self-respect and his natural pride.”</p>
				<p>As she spoke, Sabine rang the bell, to show her visitor that the conversation was at an end.</p>
				<p>“Have you informed my mother of <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay’s arrival?” asked she, as the footman appeared at the door.</p>
				<p>“I have not, mademoiselle; for both the Count and Countess gave the strictest order that they were not to be disturbed on any pretext whatsoever.”</p>
				<p>“Why did you not tell me that before?” demanded <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh; and, without waiting for any explanation, he bowed gravely to Sabine, and quitted the room, after apologizing for his involuntary intrusion, and by his manner permitted all the domestics to see that he was much put out.</p>
				<p>“Ah!” sighed Sabine, “that man is worthy of some good and true woman’s affection.”</p>
				<p>As she was about to leave the room, she heard someone insisting upon seeing the Count de Mussidan. Not being desirous of meeting strangers, she remained where she was. The servant persisted in saying that his master could receive no one.</p>
				<p>“What do I care for your orders?” cried the visitor; “your master would never refuse to see his friend the Baron de Clinchain;” and, thrusting the lackey on one side, he entered the drawing-room; and his agitation was so great that he hardly noticed the presence of the young girl.</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Clinchain was a thoroughly commonplace looking personage in face, figure, and dress, neither tall nor short, handsome nor ill-looking. The only noticeable point in his attire was that he wore a coral hand on his watch chain; for the Baron was a firm believer in the evil eye. When a young man, he was most methodical in his habits; and, as he grew older, this became an absolute mania with him. When he was twenty, he recorded in his diary the pulsations of his heart, and at forty he added remarks regarding his digestion and general health.</p>
				<p>“What a fearful blow!” murmured he; “and to fall at such a moment when I had indulged in a more hearty dinner than usual. I shall feel it for the next six months, even if it does not kill me outright.”</p>
				<p>Just then <abbr>M.</abbr> de Mussidan entered the room, and the excited man ran up to him, exclaiming⁠—</p>
				<p>“For Heaven’s sake, Octave, save us both, by cancelling your daughter’s engagement with <abbr>M.</abbr> de⁠—”</p>
				<p>The Count laid his hand upon his friend’s lips.</p>
				<p>“Are you mad?” said he; “my daughter is here.”</p>
				<p>In obedience to a warning gesture, Sabine left the room; but she had heard enough to fill her heart with agitation and terror. What engagement was to be cancelled, and how could such a rupture affect her father or his friend? That there was some mystery, was proved by the question with which the Count had prevented his friend from saying any more. She was sure that it was the name of <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay with which the Baron was about to close his sentence, and felt that the destiny of her life was to be decided in the conversation about to take place between her father and his visitor. It was deep anxiety that she felt, not mere curiosity; and while these thoughts passed through her brain, she remembered that she could hear all from the card-room, the doorway of which was only separated from the drawing-room by a curtain. With a soft, gliding step she gained her hiding-place and listened intently. The Baron was still pouring out his lamentations.</p>
				<p>“What a fearful day this has been!” groaned the unhappy man. “I ate much too heavy a breakfast, I have been terribly excited, and came here a great deal too fast. A fit of passion caused by a servant’s insolence, joy at seeing you, then a sudden interruption to what I was going to say, are a great deal more than sufficient to cause a serious illness at my age.”</p>
				<p>But the Count, who was usually most considerate of his friend’s foibles, was not in a humor to listen to him.</p>
				<p>“Come, let us talk sense,” said he sharply; “tell me what has occurred.”</p>
				<p>“Occurred!” groaned De Clinchain; “oh, nothing, except that the whole truth is known regarding what took place in the little wood so many years back. I had an anonymous letter this morning, threatening me with all sorts of terrible consequences if I do not hinder you from marrying your daughter to De Breulh. The rogues say that they can prove everything.”</p>
				<p>“Have you the letter with you?”</p>
				<p>De Clinchain drew the missive from his pocket. It was to the full as threatening as he had said; but <abbr>M.</abbr> de Mussidan knew all its contents beforehand.</p>
				<p>“Have you examined your diary, and are the three leaves really missing?”</p>
				<p>“They are.”</p>
				<p>“How were they stolen? Are you sure of your servants?”</p>
				<p>“Certainly; my valet has been sixteen years in my service. You know Lorin? The volumes of my diary are always locked up in the escritoire, the key of which never leaves me. And none of the other servants ever enter my room.”</p>
				<p>“Someone must have done so, however.”</p>
				<p>Clinchain struck his forehead, as though an idea had suddenly flashed across his brain.</p>
				<p>“I can partly guess,” said he. “Some time ago Lorin went for a holiday, and got drunk with some fellows he picked up in the train. Drink brought on fighting, and he was so knocked about that he was laid up for some weeks. He had a severe knife wound in the shoulder and was much bruised.”</p>
				<p>“Who took his place?”</p>
				<p>“A young fellow that my groom got at a servants’ registry office.”</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Mussidan felt that he was on the right track, for he remembered that the man who had called on him had had the audacity to leave a card, on which was marked:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><b><abbr class="name">B.</abbr> Mascarin</b>,</p>
					<p>
						<i>Servants’ Registry Office</i>
					</p>
					<p>
						<i>Rue Montorgueil.</i>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Do you know where this place is?” asked he.</p>
				<p>“Certainly; in the Rue du Dauphin nearly opposite to my house.”</p>
				<p>The Count swore a deep oath. “The rogues are very wily; but, my dear fellow if you are ready, we will defy the storm together.”</p>
				<p>De Clinchain felt a cold tremor pass through his whole frame at this proposal.</p>
				<p>“Not I,” said he; “do not try and persuade me. If you have come to this decision, let me know at once, and I will go home and finish it all with a pistol bullet.”</p>
				<p>He was just the sort of nervous, timorous man to do exactly as he said, and would sooner have killed himself than endure all kinds of annoyance, which might impair his digestion.</p>
				<p>“Very well,” answered his friend, with sullen resignation, “then I will give in.”</p>
				<p>De Clinchain heaved a deep sigh of relief, for he, not knowing what had passed before, had expected to have had a much more difficult task in persuading his friend.</p>
				<p>“You are acting like a reasonable man for once in your life,” said he.</p>
				<p>“You think so, because I give ear to your timorous advice. A thousand curses on that idiotic habit of yours of putting on paper not only your own secrets, but those of others.”</p>
				<p>But at this remark Clinchain mounted his hobby.</p>
				<p>“Do not talk like that,” said he. “Had you not committed the act, it would not have appeared in my diary.”</p>
				<p>Chilled to the very bone, and quivering like an aspen leaf, Sabine had listened to every word. The reality was even more dreadful than she had dreamed of. There was a hidden sorrow, a crime in her father’s past life.</p>
				<p>Again the Count spoke. “There is no use in recrimination. We cannot wipe out the past, and must, therefore, submit. I promise you, on my honor, that this day I will write to De Breulh, and tell him this marriage must be given up.”</p>
				<p>These words threw the balm of peace and safety into De Clinchain’s soul, but the excess of joy was too much for him, and murmuring, “Too much breakfast, and the shock of too violent an emotion,” he sank back, fainting, on a couch.</p>
				<p>The Count de Mussidan was terrified, he pulled the bell furiously, and the domestics rushed in, followed by the Countess. Restoratives were applied, and in ten minutes the Baron opened one eye, and raised himself on his elbow.</p>
				<p>“I am better now,” said he, with a faint smile. “It is weakness and dizziness. I know what I ought to take⁠—two spoonfuls of <i xml:lang="fr">eau des carmes</i> in a glass of sugar and water, with perfect repose of both mind and body. Fortunately, my carriage is here. Pray, be prudent, Mussidan.” And, leaning upon the arm of one of the lackeys, he staggered feebly out, leaving the Count and Countess alone, and Sabine still listening from her post of espial in the card-room.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
