<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18: An Infamous Trade</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-18" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">An Infamous Trade</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Mascarin, who was anxious to make as deep an impression as possible upon Croisenois and Paul, broke off his story abruptly, and paced up and down the room. Had his intention been to startle his audience, he had most certainly succeeded. Paul was breathless with interest, and Croisenois broke down in attempting to make one of his usual trivial remarks. He was not particularly intelligent, except as regarded his self-interests, and though, of course, he knew that there must be some connection between his interests and the recital that Mascarin had just made, he could not for the life of him make out what it was. Mascarin seemed utterly careless of the effect that he had produced. But the next time that his walk brought him to his desk he stopped, and, adjusting his glasses, said, “I trust, Marquis, that you will forgive this long preliminary address, which would really make a good sensational novel; but we have now arrived at the really practical part of the business.” As he said these words, he took up an imposing attitude, with his elbow resting on the mantelpiece.</p>
				<p>“On the night of which I have spoken, I and my friends released ourselves from all the bonds of virtue and honor, and freed ourselves from all the fetters of duty to our fellow-men. The plan emanated from my brain complete in all its details in the will I made twenty years ago to my friends. Marquis, as the summer goes on, you know that the ripest and reddest cherries are the fullest flavored, just so, in the noblest and wealthiest of families in Paris there is not one that has not some terrible and ghostly secret which is sedulously concealed. Now, suppose that one man should gain possession of all of them, would he not be sole and absolute master? Would he not be more powerful than a despot on his throne? Would he not be able to sway society in any manner he might think fit? Well, I said to myself, I will be that man!”</p>
				<p>Ever since the Marquis had been in relation with Mascarin, he had shrewdly suspected that his business was not conducted on really fair principles.</p>
				<p>“What you mention,” said he, “is nothing but an elaborate and extended system of blackmail.”</p>
				<p>Mascarin bowed low, with an ironical smile on his face. “Just so, Marquis, just so; you have hit on the very name. The word is modern, but the operation doubtless dates from the earliest ages. The day upon which one man began to trade upon the guilty secret of another was the date of the institution of this line of business. If antiquity makes a thing respectable, then blackmailing is worthy of great respect.”</p>
				<p>“But, sir,” said the Marquis, with a flush upon his face, “but, sir⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Pshaw!” broke in Mascarin, “does a mere word frighten you? Who has not done some of it in his time? Why, look at yourself. Do you not recollect this winter that you detected a young man cheating at cards? You said nothing to him at the time, but you found out that he was rich, and, calling upon him the next day, borrowed ten thousand francs. When do you intend to repay that loan?”</p>
				<p>Croisenois sank back in his chair, overcome with surprise at this display of knowledge on Mascarin’s part. “This is too terrible,” muttered he, but Mascarin went on⁠—</p>
				<p>“I know, at least, two thousand persons in Paris who only exist by the exercise of this profession; for I have studied them all, from the convict who screws money out of his former companions, in penal servitude, to the titled villain, who, having discovered the frailty of some unhappy woman, forces her to give him her daughter as his wife. I know a mere messenger in the Rue Douai, who in five years amassed a comfortable fortune. Can you guess how? When he was entrusted with a letter, he invariably opened it, and made himself master of its contents, and if there was a compromising word in it, he pounced down upon either the writer or the person to whom it was addressed. I also know of one large limited company which pays an annual income to a scoundrel with half a dozen foreign orders, who has found out that they have broken their statutes of association, and holds proofs of their having done so. But the police are on the alert, and our courts deal very severely with blackmailers.”</p>
				<p>Mascarin went on: “The English, however, are our masters, for in London a compromising servant is as easily negotiable as a sound bill of exchange. There is in the city a respectable jeweller, who will advance money on any compromising letter with a good name at the foot. His shop is a regular pawnshop of infamy. In the States it has been elevated to the dignity of a profession, and the citizen at New York dreads the blackmailers more than the police, if he is meditating some dishonorable action. Our first operations did not bring in any quick returns, and the harvest promised to be a late one; but you have come upon us just as we are about to reap our harvest. The professions of Hortebise and Catenac⁠—the one a doctor and the other a lawyer⁠—facilitated our operations greatly. One administered to the diseases of the body, and the other to that of the purse, and, of course, thus they became professors of many secrets. As for me, the head and chief, it would not do to remain an idle looker-on. Our funds had dwindled down a good deal, and, after mature consideration, I decided to hire this house, and open a Servants’ Registry Office. Such an occupation would not attract any attention, and in the end it turned out a perfect success, as my friends can testify.”</p>
				<p>Catenac and Hortebise both nodded assent.</p>
				<p>“By the system which I have adopted,” resumed Mascarin, “the wealthy and respectable man is as strictly watched in his own house as is the condemned wretch in his cell; for no act of his escapes the eyes of the servants whom we have placed around him. He can hardly even conceal his thoughts from us. Even the very secret that he has murmured to his wife with closed doors reaches our ears.”</p>
				<p>The Marquis gave a supercilious smile.</p>
				<p>“You must have had some inkling of this,” observed Mascarin, “for you have never taken a servant from our establishment; but for all that, I am as well posted up in your affairs as yourself. You have even now about you a valet of whom you know nothing.”</p>
				<p>“Morel was recommended to me by one of my most intimate friends⁠—Sir Richard Wakefield.”</p>
				<p>“But for all that I have had my suspicions of him; but we will talk of this later, and we will now return to the subject upon which we have met. As I told you, I conceal the immense power I had attained through our agency, and use it as occasion presents itself, and after twenty years’ patient labor, I am about to reap a stupendous harvest. The police pay enormous sums to their secret agents, while I, without opening my purse, have an army of devoted adherents. I see perhaps fifty servants of both sexes daily; calculate what this will amount to in a year.”</p>
				<p>There was an air of complacency about the man as he explained the working of his system, and a ring of triumph in his voice.</p>
				<p>“You must not think that all my agents are in my secrets, for the greater part of them are quite unaware of what they are doing, and in this lies my strength. Each of them brings me a slender thread, which I twine into the mighty cord by which I hold my slaves. These unsuspecting agents remind me of those strange Brazilian birds, whose presence is a sure sign that water is to be found near at hand. When one of them utters a note, I dig, and I find. And now, Marquis, do you understand the aim and end of our association?”</p>
				<p>“It has,” remarked Hortebise quietly, “brought us in some years two hundred and fifty thousand francs apiece.”</p>
				<p>If M. de Croisenois disliked prosy tales, he by no means underrated the eloquence of figures. He knew quite enough of Paris to understand that if Mascarin threw his net regularly, he would infallibly catch many fish. With this conviction firmly implanted in his mind, he did not require much urging to look with favor on the scheme, and, putting on a gracious smile, he now asked, “And what must I do to deserve admission into this association?”</p>
				<p>Paul had listened in wonder and terror, but by degrees all feelings of disgust at the criminality of these men faded away before the power that they unquestionably possessed.</p>
				<p>“If,” resumed Mascarin, “we have up to this met with no serious obstacles, it is because, though apparently acting rashly, we are in reality most prudent and cautious. We have managed our slaves well, and have not driven anyone to desperation. But we are beginning to weary of our profession; we are getting old, and we have need of repose. We intend, therefore, to retire, but before that we wish to have all matters securely settled. I have an immense mass of documentary evidence, but it is not always easy to realize the value they represent, and I wait upon your assistance to enable me to do so.”</p>
				<p>Croisenois’ face fell. Was he to take compromising letters round to his acquaintances and boldly say, “Your purse or your honor?” He had no objection to share the profits of this ignoble trade, but he objected strongly to showing his connection with it openly. “No, no,” cried he hastily, “you must not depend upon me.”</p>
				<p>He seemed so much in earnest that Hortebise and Catenac exchanged glances of dismay.</p>
				<p>“Let us have no nonsense,” returned Mascarin sternly, “and wait a little before you display so much fierceness. I told you that my documentary evidence was of a peculiar kind. We very often had among our fish married people who cannot deal with their personal property. A husband, for instance, will say, ‘I can’t take ten thousand francs without my wife, knowing of it.’ Women say, ‘Why, I get all my money through my husband,’ and both are telling the truth. They kneel at my feet and entreat me to have mercy, saying, ‘Find me some excuse for using a portion of my funds and you shall have more than you ask.’ For a long time I have sought for this means, and at last I have found it in the Limited Company, which you, Marquis, will float next month.”</p>
				<p>“Really!” returned the Marquis. “I do not see⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I beg your pardon; you see it all clearly. A husband who cannot, without fear of disturbing his domestic peace, put in five thousand francs, can put in ten thousand if he tells his wife, ‘It is an investment;’ and many a wife who has not any money of her own will persuade her husband to bring in the money we require by the proposal to take shares. Now, what do you say to the idea?”</p>
				<p>“I think that it is an excellent one, but what part am I to play in it?”</p>
				<p>“In taking the part of Chairman of the Company. I could not do so, being merely the proprietor of a Servant’s Registry Office. Hortebise, as a doctor, and more than all a homeopath, would inspire no confidence, and Catenac’s legal profession prevents him appearing in the matter openly. He will act as our legal adviser.”</p>
				<p>“But really I do not see anything about me that would induce people to invest,” remarked De Croisenois.</p>
				<p>“You are too modest; you have your name and rank, which, however we may look upon them, have a great effect upon the general public. There are many Companies who pay directors of rank and credible connection very largely. Before starting this enterprise you can settle all your debts, and the world will then conclude that you are possessed of great wealth, while, at the same time, the news of your approaching marriage with Mademoiselle du Mussidan will be the general talk of society. What better position could you be in?”</p>
				<p>“But I have the reputation of being a reckless spendthrift.”</p>
				<p>“All the better. The day the prospectus comes out with your name at the head of it, there will be a universal burst of laughter. Men will say, ‘Do you see what Croisenois is at now? What on earth possessed him to go into Company work?’ But as this proceeding on your part will have paid your debts and given you Mademoiselle Sabine’s dowry, I think that the laugh will be on your side.”</p>
				<p>The prospect dazzled Des Croisenois.</p>
				<p>“And suppose I accept,” asked he, “what will be the end of the farce?”</p>
				<p>“Very simple. When all the shares are taken up, you will close the office and let the Company look after itself.”</p>
				<p>Croisenois started to his feet angrily. “Why,” cried he, “you intend to make a catspaw of me! Such a proceeding would send me to penal servitude.”</p>
				<p>“What an ungrateful man he is!” said Mascarin, appealing to his audience, “when I am doing all I can to prevent his going there.”</p>
				<p>“Sir!”</p>
				<p>But Catenac now felt it time to interfere. “You do not understand,” remarked he, addressing Croisenois. “You will start a Company for the development of some native product, let us say Pyrenean marble, for instance, issue a prospectus, and the shares will be at once taken up by Mascarin’s clients.”</p>
				<p>“Well, what happens then?”</p>
				<p>“Why, out of the funds thus obtained we will take care when the crash comes to reimburse any outsiders who may have taken shares in the concern, telling them that the thing has been a failure, and that we are ruined; while Mascarin will take care to obtain from all his clients a discharge in full, so the Company will quietly collapse.”</p>
				<p>“But,” objected the Marquis, “all the shareholders will know that I am a rogue.”</p>
				<p>“Naturally.”</p>
				<p>“They would hold me in utter contempt.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps so, but they would never venture to let you see it. I never thought that you would make objections; and whose character, however deep, will bear investigation?”</p>
				<p>“Are you sure that you hold your people securely?” asked he; “and that none of them will turn surly?”</p>
				<p>Mascarin was waiting for this question, and taking from his desk the pieces of cardboard which he took so much pains to arrange, he replied, “I have here the names of three hundred and fifty people who will each invest ten thousand francs in the Company. Listen to me, and judge for yourself.”</p>
				<p>He put all three pieces of cardboard together, and then drawing out one he read⁠—</p>
				<p>“ ‘N⁠—, civil engineer. Five letters written by him to the gentleman who procured his appointment for him: worth fifteen thousand francs.’</p>
				<p>“ ‘P⁠—, merchant. Absolute proof that his last bankruptcy was a fraudulent one, and that he kept back from his creditors two hundred thousand francs. Good for twenty thousand francs.’</p>
				<p>“ ‘Madame <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>⁠—. A photograph taken in very light and airy costume. Poor, but can pay three thousand francs.’</p>
				<p>“ ‘M. H⁠—. Three letters from her mother, proving that the daughter had compromised herself before marriage. Letter from a monthly nurse appended. Can be made to pay ten thousand francs.’</p>
				<p>“ ‘<span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>⁠—, a portion of his correspondence with L⁠— in 1848. Three thousand francs.’</p>
				<p>“ ‘Madame M. de M⁠—. A true history of her adventure with M. J⁠—.’ ”</p>
				<p>This sample was quite sufficient to satisfy M. de Croisenois. “Enough,” cried he, “I yield. I bow before your gigantic power, which utterly surpasses that of the police. Give me your orders.”</p>
				<p>Before this Mascarin had conquered Hortebise and Paul Violaine, and now he had the Marquis at his feet. Many times during this conversation the Marquis had more than once endeavored to make up his mind to withdraw entirely from the business, but he had been unable to resist the strange fascination of that mysterious person who had been laying bare his scheme with such extraordinary audacity. The few vestiges of honesty that were still left in his corrupted soul revolted at the thought of the shameful compact into which he was about to enter, but the dazzling prospect held out before his eyes silenced his scruples, and he felt a certain pride in being the associate of men who possessed such seemingly illimitable power. Mascarin saw that there was no longer any necessity for the extreme firmness with which he had before spoken, and it was with the most studied courtesy that he replied: “I have no orders to give you, Marquis, our interests are identical, and we must all have a voice in the deliberations as to the best means of carrying them out.”</p>
				<p>This change from hauteur to suavity gratified Croisenois’ pride immensely.</p>
				<p>“Now,” continued Mascarin, “let us speak of your own circumstances. You wrote to me recently that you had nothing, and I am aware that you have no expectations for the future.”</p>
				<p>“Excuse me, but there is the fortune of my poor brother George, who disappeared so mysteriously.”</p>
				<p>“Let me assure you,” answered Mascarin, “that we had better be perfectly frank with each other.”</p>
				<p>“And am I not so?” answered the Marquis.</p>
				<p>“Why, in talking of this imaginary fortune?”</p>
				<p>“It is not imaginary; it is real, and a very large one, too, about twelve or fourteen hundred thousand francs, and I can obtain it, for, by Articles 127 and 129 of the Code Napoleon⁠—”</p>
				<p>He interrupted himself, as he saw an expression of hardly-restrained laughter upon the features of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise.</p>
				<p>“Do not talk nonsense,” answered Mascarin. “You could at first have filed an affidavit regarding your brother’s disappearance, and applied to the Court to appoint you trustee, but this is now exactly what you wish to avoid.”</p>
				<p>“Why not, pray? Do you think⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Pooh, pooh, but you have raised so much money on this inheritance that there is nothing of it left hardly, certainly not sufficient to pay your debts. It is the bait you used to allure your tradespeople into giving you credit.”</p>
				<p>At finding himself so easily fathomed, Croisenois burst into a peel of laughter. Mascarin had by this time thrown himself into an armchair, as though utterly worn out by fatigue.</p>
				<p>“There is no necessity, Marquis,” said he, “to detain you here longer. We shall meet again shortly, and settle matters. Meanwhile Catenac will draw up the prospectus and Articles of Association of the proposed Company, and post you up in the financial slang of which you must occasionally make use.”</p>
				<p>The Marquis and the lawyer at once rose and took their leave. As soon as the door had closed behind them, Mascarin seemed to recover his energy.</p>
				<p>“Well, Paul,” said he, “what do you think of all this?”</p>
				<p>Like all men with weak and ductile natures, Paul, after being almost prostrated by the first discovery of his master’s villainy, had now succeeded in smothering the dictates of his conscience, and adopted a cynical tone quite worthy of his companions.</p>
				<p>“I see,” said he, “that you have need of me. Well, I am not a Marquis, but you will find me quite as trustworthy and obedient.”</p>
				<p>Paul’s reply did not seem to surprise Mascarin, but it is doubtful whether he was pleased by it, for his countenance showed traces of a struggle between extreme satisfaction and intense annoyance, while the doctor was surprised at the cool audacity of the young man whose mind he had undertaken to form.</p>
				<p>Paul was a little disturbed by the long and continued silence of his patron, and at last he ventured to say timidly⁠—</p>
				<p>“Well, sir, I am anxious to know under what conditions I am to be shown the way to make my fortune and marry Mademoiselle Flavia Rigal, whom I love.”</p>
				<p>Mascarin gave a diabolical smile.</p>
				<p>“Whose dowry you love,” he observed. “Let us speak plainly.”</p>
				<p>“Pardon me, sir, I said just what I meant.”</p>
				<p>The doctor, who had not Mascarin’s reasons for gravity, now burst into a jovial laugh.</p>
				<p>“And that pretty Rose,” said he, “what of her?”</p>
				<p>“Rose is a creature of the past,” answered Paul. “I can now see what an idiot I was, and I have entirely effaced her from my memory, and I am half inclined to deplore that Mademoiselle Rigal is an heiress, the more so if it is to form a barrier between us.”</p>
				<p>This declaration seemed to make Mascarin more easy.</p>
				<p>“Reassure yourself, my boy,” said he, “we will remove that barrier; but I will not conceal from you that the part you have to play is much more difficult than that assigned to the Marquis de Croisenois; but if it is harder and more perilous, the reward will be proportionately greater.”</p>
				<p>“With your aid and advice I feel capable of doing everything necessary,” returned Paul.</p>
				<p>“You will need great self-confidence, the utmost self-possession, and as a commencement you must utterly destroy your present identity.”</p>
				<p>“That I will do with the utmost willingness.”</p>
				<p>“You must become another person entirely; you must adopt his name, his gait, his behavior, his virtues, and even his failings. You must forget all that you have either said or done. You must always think that you are in reality the person you represent yourself to be, for this is the only way in which you can lead others into a similar belief. Your task will be a heavy one.”</p>
				<p>“Ah, sir,” cried the young man, enthusiastically, “can you doubt me?”</p>
				<p>“The glorious beam of success that shines ahead of you will take your attention from the difficulties and dangers of the road that you are treading.”</p>
				<p>The genial <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hortebise rubbed his hands.</p>
				<p>“You are right,” cried he, “quite right.”</p>
				<p>“When you have done this,” resumed Mascarin, “we shall not hesitate to acquaint you with the secret of the lofty destiny that awaits you. Do you understand me fully?”</p>
				<p>Here the speaker was interrupted by the entrance of Beaumarchef, who had signified his desire to come in by three distinct raps upon the door. He was now gorgeous to look upon, for having taken advantage of a spare half hour, he had donned his best clothes.</p>
				<p>“What is it?” demanded Mascarin.</p>
				<p>“Here are two letters, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Thank you; hand them to me, and leave us.”</p>
				<p>As soon as they were once more alone, Mascarin examined the letters.</p>
				<p>“Ah,” cried he, “one from Van Klopen, and the other from the Hotel de Mussidan. Let us first see what our friend the man-milliner has to say.</p>
				<p>“DEAR SIR⁠—</p>
				<p>“You may be at ease. Our mutual friend Verminet has executed your orders most adroitly. At his instigation Gaston de Gandelu has forged the banker Martin Rigal’s signature on five different bills. I hold them, and awaiting your further orders regarding them, and also with respect to Madame de Bois Arden,</p>
				<p>“I remain your obedient servant,</p>
				<p>“VAN KLOPEN.”</p>
				<p>Tossing it on the table, Mascarin opened the other letter, which he also read aloud.</p>
				<p>“SIR⁠—</p>
				<p>“I have to report to you the breaking off of the marriage between Mademoiselle Sabine and M. de Breulh-Faverlay. Mademoiselle is very ill, and I heard the medical man say that she might not survive the next twenty-four hours.</p>
				<p>“FLORESTAN.”</p>
				<p>Mascarin was so filled with rage on learning this piece of news, which seemed likely to interfere with his plans, that he struck his hand down heavily on the table.</p>
				<p>“Damnation!” cried he. “If this little fool should die now, all our work will have to be recommenced.”</p>
				<p>He thrust aside his chair, and paced hurriedly up and down the room.</p>
				<p>“Florestan is right,” said he; “this illness of the girl comes on at the date of the rupture of the engagement. There is some secret that we must learn, for we dare not work in the dark.”</p>
				<p>“Shall I go to the Hotel de Mussidan?” asked Hortebise.</p>
				<p>“Not a bad idea. Your carriage is waiting, is it not? You can go in your capacity as a medical man.”</p>
				<p>The doctor was preparing to go, when Mascarin arrested his progress.</p>
				<p>“No,” said he, “I have changed my mind. We must neither of us be seen near the place. I expect that one of our mines has exploded; that the Count and Countess have exchanged confidences, and that between the two the daughter has been struck down.”</p>
				<p>“How shall we find this out?”</p>
				<p>“I will see Florestan and try and find out.”</p>
				<p>In an instant he vanished into his inner room, and as he changed his dress, continued to converse with the doctor.</p>
				<p>“This blow would be comparatively trifling, if I had not so much on hand, but I have Paul to look after. The Champdoce affair must be pressed on, for Catenac, the traitor, has put the Duke and Perpignan into communication. I must see Perpignan and discover how much has been told him, and how much he has guessed. I will also see Caroline Schimmel, and extract something from her. I wish to heaven that there were thirty-six hours in the day instead of only twenty-four.”</p>
				<p>By this time he had completed his change of costume and called the doctor into his room.</p>
				<p>“I am off, now,” whispered he; “do not lose sight of Paul for a single instant, for we are not sufficiently sure of him to let him go about alone with our secret in his possession. Take him to dine at Martin Rigal’s, and then make some excuse for keeping him all night at your rooms. See me tomorrow.”</p>
				<p>And he went out so hurriedly that he did not hear the cheery voice of the doctor calling after him⁠—</p>
				<p>“Good luck; I wish you all good luck.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
