<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX: A Friendly Rival</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">A Friendly Rival</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On leaving the Hotel de Mussidan, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay dismissed his carriage, for he felt as a man often does after experiencing some violent emotion, the absolute necessity for exercise, and to be alone with his thoughts, and by so doing recover his self-possession. His friends would have been surprised if they had seen him pacing hurriedly along the Champs Élysées. The usual calm of his manner had vanished, and the generally calm expression of his features was entirely absent. As he walked, he talked to himself, and gesticulated.</p>
			<p>“And this is what we call being a man of the world. We think ourselves true philosophers, and a look from a pair of beautiful, pleading eyes scatters all our theories to the winds.”</p>
			<p>He had loved Sabine upon the day on which he had asked for her hand, but not so fondly as upon this day when he had learned that she could no longer be his wife, for, from the moment he had made this discovery, she seemed to him more gifted and fascinating than ever. No one could have believed that he, the idol of society, the petted darling of the women, and the successful rival of the men, could have been refused by the young girl to whom he had offered his hand.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” murmured he with a sigh, “for she is just the companion for life that I longed for. Where could I find so intelligent an intellect and so pure a mind, united with such radiant beauty, so different from the women of society, who live but for dress and gossip. Has Sabine anything in common with those giddy girls who look upon life as a perpetual value, and who take a husband as they do a partner, because they cannot dance without one? How her face lighted up as she spoke of him, and how thoroughly she puts faith in him! The end of it all is that I shall die a bachelor. In my old age I will take to the pleasures of the table, for an excellent authority declares that a man can enjoy his four meals a day with comfort. Well, that is something to look forward to certainly, and it will not impair my digestion if my heirs and expectants come and squabble round my armchair. Ah,” he added, with a deep sigh, “my life has been a failure.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay was a very different type of man to that which both his friends and his enemies popularly supposed him to be. Upon the death of his uncle, he had plunged into the frivolous vortex of Parisian dissipation, but of this he had soon wearied.</p>
			<p>All that he had cared for was to see the doings of his racehorse chronicled in the sporting journals, and occasionally to expend a few thousand francs in presents of jewelry to some fashionable actress. But he had secretly longed for some more honorable manner of fulfilling his duties in life, and he had determined that before his marriage he would sell his stud and break with his old associates entirely; and now this wished-for marriage would never take place.</p>
			<p>When he entered his club, the traces of his agitation were so visible upon his face, that some of the card-players stopped their game to inquire if Chambertin, the favorite for the Chantilly cup, had broken down.</p>
			<p>“No, no,” replied he, as he hurriedly made his way to the writing-room, “Chambertin is as sound as a bell.”</p>
			<p>“What the deuce has happened to De Breulh?” asked one of the members.</p>
			<p>“Goodness gracious!” remarked the man to whom the question was addressed, “he seems in a hurry to write a letter.”</p>
			<p>The gentleman was right. <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh was writing a withdrawal from his demand for Sabine’s hand to <abbr>M.</abbr> de Mussidan, and he found the task by no means an easy one, for on reading it over he found that there was a valid strain of bitterness throughout it, which would surely attract attention and perhaps cause embarrassing questions to be put to him.</p>
			<p>“No,” murmured he, “this letter is quite unworthy of me.” And tearing it up, he began another, in which he strung together several conventional excuses, alleging the difficulty of breaking off his former habits and of an awkward entanglement which he had been unable to break with, as he had anticipated. When this little masterpiece of diplomacy was completed, he rang the bell, and, handing it to one of the club servants, told him to take it to the Count de Mussidan’s house. When this unpleasant duty was over, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh had hoped to experience some feeling of relief, but in this he was mistaken. He tried cards, but rose from the table in a quarter of an hour; he ordered dinner, but appetite was wanting; he went to the opera, but then he did nothing but yawn, and the music grated on his nerves. At length he returned home. The day had seemed interminable, and he could not sleep, for Sabine’s face was ever before him. Who could this man be whom she so fondly loved and preferred before all others? He respected her too much not to feel assured that her choice was a worthy one, but his experience had taught him that when so many men of the world fell into strange entanglements, a poor girl without knowledge of the dangers around her might easily be entrapped. “If he is worthy of her,” thought he, “I will do my best to aid her; but if not, I will open her eyes.”</p>
			<p>At four o’clock in the morning he was still seated musing before the expiring embers of his fire; he had made up his mind to see André⁠—there was no difficulty in this, for a man of taste and wealth can find a ready excuse for visiting the studio of a struggling artist. He had no fixed plan as to what he would say or do, he left all to chance, and with this decision he went to bed, and by two in the afternoon he drove straight to the Rue de la Tour d’Auvergne.</p>
			<p>André’s discreet portress was as usual leaning on her broom in the gallery as <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh’s magnificent equipage drew up.</p>
			<p>“Gracious me!” exclaimed the worthy woman, dazzled by the gorgeousness of the whole turnout; “he can’t be coming here, he must have mistaken the house.”</p>
			<p>But her amazement reached its height when <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh, on alighting, asked for André.</p>
			<p>“Fourth story, first door to the right,” answered the woman; “but I will show you the way.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t trouble yourself;” and with these words <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh ascended the staircase that led to the painter’s studio and knocked on the door. As he did so, he heard a quick, light step upon the stairs, and a young and very dark man, dressed in a weaver’s blouse and carrying a tin pail which he had evidently just filled with water from the cistern, came up.</p>
			<p>“Are you <abbr>M.</abbr> André?” asked De Breulh.</p>
			<p>“That is my name, sir.”</p>
			<p>“I wish to say a few words to you.”</p>
			<p>“Pray come in,” replied the young artist, opening the door of his studio and ushering his visitor in. André’s voice and expression had made a favorable impression upon his visitor; but he was, in spite of his having thrown aside nearly all foolish prejudices, a little startled at his costume. He did not, however, allow his surprise to be visible.</p>
			<p>“I ought to apologize for receiving you like this,” remarked André quickly, “but a poor man must wait upon himself.” As he spoke, he threw off his blouse and set down the pail in a corner of the room.</p>
			<p>“I rather should offer my excuse for my intrusion,” returned <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh. “I came here by the advice of one of my friends;” he stopped for an instant, endeavoring to think of a name.</p>
			<p>“By Prince Crescensi, perhaps,” suggested André.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” continued <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh, eagerly snatching at the rope the artist held out to him. “The Prince sings your praises everywhere, and speaks of your talents with the utmost enthusiasm. I am, on his recommendation, desirous of commissioning you to paint a picture for me, and I can assure you that in my gallery it will have no need to be ashamed of its companions.”</p>
			<p>André bowed, coloring deeply at the compliment.</p>
			<p>“I am obliged to you,” said he, “and I trust that you will not be disappointed in taking the Prince’s opinion of my talent.”</p>
			<p>“Why should I be so?”</p>
			<p>“Because, for the last four months I have been so busy that I have really nothing to show you.”</p>
			<p>“That is of no importance. I have every confidence in you.”</p>
			<p>“Then,” returned André, “all that we have to do is to choose a subject.”</p>
			<p>André’s manner had by this time so captivated De Breulh that he muttered to himself, “I really ought to hate this fellow, but on my word I like him better than anyone I have met for a long time.”</p>
			<p>André had by this time placed a large portfolio on the table. “Here,” said he, “are some twenty or thirty sketches; if any of them took your fancy, you could make your choice.”</p>
			<p>“Let me see them,” returned De Breulh politely, for having made an estimate of the young man’s character, he now wished to see what his artistic talents were like. With this object in view he examined all the sketches in the portfolio minutely, and then turned to those on the walls. André said nothing, but he somehow felt that this visit would prove the turning-point of his misfortunes. But for all that the young man’s heart was very sad, for it was two days since Sabine had left him, promising to write to him the next morning regarding <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay, but as yet he had received no communication, and he was on the tenterhooks of expectation, not because he had any doubt of Sabine, but for the reason that he had no means of obtaining any information of what went on in the interior of the Hotel de Mussidan. <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh had now finished his survey, and had come to the conclusion that though many of André’s productions were crude and lacking in finish, yet that he had the true artistic metal in him. He extended his hand to the young man and said forcibly, “I am no longer influenced by the opinion of a friend. I have seen and judged for myself, and am more desirous than ever of possessing one of your pictures. I have made my choice of a subject, and now let us discuss the details.”</p>
			<p>As he spoke he handed a little sketch to André. It was a view of everyday life, which the painter had entitled, “Outside the Barrier.” Two men with torn garments and wine-flushed faces were struggling in tipsy combat, while on the right hand side of the picture lay a woman, bleeding profusely from a cut on the forehead, and two of her terrified companions were bending over her, endeavoring to restore her to consciousness. In the background were some flying figures, who were hastening up to separate the combatants. The sketch was one of real life, denuded of any sham element of romance, and this was the one that <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh had chosen. The two men discussed the size of the picture, and not a single detail was omitted.</p>
			<p>“I am sure that you will do all that is right,” remarked De Breulh. “Let your own inspiration guide you, and all will be well.” In reality he was dying to get away, for he felt in what a false position he was, and with a violent effort he approached the money part of the matter.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur,” said André, “it is impossible to fix a price; when completed, a picture may only be worth the canvas that it is painted on, or else beyond all price. Let us wait.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” broke in <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh, “what do you say to ten thousand francs?”</p>
			<p>“Too much,” returned André with a deprecatory wave of his hand; “far too much. If I succeed in it, as I hope to do, I will ask six thousand francs for it.”</p>
			<p>“Agreed!” answered De Breulh, taking from his pocket an elegant notecase with his crest and monogram upon it and extracting from it three thousand francs. “I will, as is usual, deposit half the price in advance.”</p>
			<p>André blushed scarlet. “You are joking,” said he.</p>
			<p>“Not at all,” answered De Breulh quietly; “I have my own way of doing business, from which I never deviate.”</p>
			<p>In spite of this answer André’s pride was hurt.</p>
			<p>“But,” remarked he, “this picture will not be ready for perhaps six or seven months. I have entered into a contract with a wealthy builder, named Candèle, to execute the outside decorations of his house.”</p>
			<p>“Never mind that,” answered <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh; “take as long as you like.”</p>
			<p>Of course, after this, André could offer no further opposition; he therefore took the money without another word.</p>
			<p>“And now,” said De Breulh, as he paused for a moment at the open doorway, “let me wish you my good luck, and if you will come and breakfast with me one day, I think I can show you some pictures which you will really appreciate.” And handing his card to the artist, he went downstairs.</p>
			<p>At first André did not glance at the card, but when he did so, the letters seemed to sear his eyeballs like a red-hot iron. For a moment he could hardly breathe, and then a feeling of intense anger took possession of him, for he felt that he had been trifled with and deceived.</p>
			<p>Hardly knowing what he was doing, he rushed out on the landing, and, leaning over the banister, called out loudly, “Sir, stop a moment!”</p>
			<p>De Breulh, who had by this time reached the bottom of the staircase, turned round.</p>
			<p>“Come back, if you please,” said André.</p>
			<p>After a moment’s hesitation, De Breulh obeyed; and when he was again in the studio, André addressed him in a voice that quivered with indignation.</p>
			<p>“Take back these notes, sir; I will not accept them.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Only that I have thought the matter over, and that I will not accept your commission.”</p>
			<p>“And why this sudden change?”</p>
			<p>“You know perfectly well, <abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh-Faverlay.”</p>
			<p>The gentleman at once saw that Sabine had mentioned his name to the young artist, and with a slight lacking of generous feeling said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Let me hear your reasons, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Because, because⁠—” stammered the young man.</p>
			<p>“Because is not an answer.”</p>
			<p>André’s confusion became greater. He would not tell the whole truth, for he would have died sooner than bring Sabine’s name into the discussion; and he could only see one way out of his difficulty.</p>
			<p>“Suppose I say that I do not like your manner or appearance,” returned he disdainfully.</p>
			<p>“Is it your wish to insult me, <abbr>M.</abbr> André?”</p>
			<p>“As you choose to take it.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh was not gifted with an immense stock of patience. He turned livid, and made a step forward; but his generous impulses restrained him, and it was in a voice broken by agitation that he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Accept my apologies, <abbr>M.</abbr> André; I fear that I have played a part unworthy of you and of myself. I ought to have given you my name at once. I know everything.”</p>
			<p>“I do not comprehend you,” answered André in a glacial voice.</p>
			<p>“Why doubt, then, if you do not understand? However, I have given you cause to do so. But, let me reassure you, Mademoiselle Sabine has spoken to me with the utmost frankness; and, if you still distrust me, let me tell you that this veiled picture is her portrait. I will say more,” continued De Breulh gravely, as the artist still kept silent; “yesterday, at Mademoiselle de Mussidan’s request, I withdrew from my position as a suitor for her hand.”</p>
			<p>André had already been touched by De Breulh’s frank and open manner, and these last words entirely conquered him.</p>
			<p>“I can never thank you enough,” began he.</p>
			<p>But De Breulh interrupted him.</p>
			<p>“A man should not be thanked for performing his duty. I should lie to you if I said that I am not painfully surprised at her communication; but tell me, had you been in my place, would you not have acted in the same manner?”</p>
			<p>“I think that I should.”</p>
			<p>“And now we are friends, are we not?” and again De Breulh held out his hand, which André clasped with enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” faltered he.</p>
			<p>“And now,” continued De Breulh, with a forced smile, “let us say no more about the picture, which was, after all, merely a pretext. As I came here I said to myself, ‘If the man to whom Mademoiselle de Mussidan has given her heart is worthy of her, I will do all I can to advance his suit with her family!’ I came here to see what you were like; and now I say to you, do me a great honor, and permit me to place myself, my fortune, and the influence of my friends, at your disposal.”</p>
			<p>The offer was made in perfect good faith, but André shook his head.</p>
			<p>“I shall never forget your kindness in making this offer, but⁠—”; he paused for a moment, and then went on: “I will be as open as you have been, and will tell you the whole truth. You may think me foolish; but remember, though I am poor, I have still my self-respect to maintain. I love Sabine, and would give my life for her. Do not be offended at what I am about to say. I would, however, sooner give up her hand than be indebted for it to you.”</p>
			<p>“But this is mere madness.”</p>
			<p>“No, sir, it is the purest wisdom; for were I to accede to your wishes, I should feel deeply humiliated by the thought of your self-denial; for I should be madly jealous of the part you were playing. You are of high birth and princely fortune, while I am utterly friendless and unknown; all that I am deficient in you possess.”</p>
			<p>“But I have been poor myself,” interposed De Breulh, “and perhaps endured even greater miseries than ever you have done. Do you know what I was doing at your age? I was slowly starving to death at Sonora, and had to take the humblest position in a cattle ranch. Do you think that those days taught me nothing?”</p>
			<p>“You will be able to judge me all the more clearly then,” returned André. “If I raise myself up to Sabine’s level, as she begged me to, then I shall feel that I am your equal; but if I accept your aid, I am your dependent; and I will obey her wishes or perish in the effort.”</p>
			<p>Up to this moment the passion which stirred André’s inmost soul had breathed in every word he uttered; but, checking himself by a mighty effort, he resumed in a tone of greater calmness⁠—</p>
			<p>“But I ought to remember how much we already owe you, and I hope that you will allow me to call myself your friend?”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Breulh’s noble nature enabled him to understand André’s scruples; his feelings, however, would not for the instant enable him to speak. He slowly put the notes back in their receptacle, and then said in a low voice⁠—</p>
			<p>“Your conduct is that of an honorable man; and remember this, at all times and seasons you may rely upon De Breulh-Faverlay. Farewell!”</p>
			<p>As soon as he was alone, André threw himself into an armchair, and mused over this unexpected interview, which had proved a source of such solace to his feelings. All that he now longed for was a letter from Sabine. At this moment the portress entered with a letter. André was so occupied with his thoughts that he hardly noticed this act of condescension on the part of the worthy woman.</p>
			<p>“A letter!” exclaimed he; and, tearing it open, he glanced at the signature. But Sabine’s name was not there; it was signed Modeste. What could Sabine’s maid have to say to him? He felt that some great misfortune was impending, and, trembling with excitement, he read the letter.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Sir⁠—</p>
				<p>I write to tell you that my mistress has succeeded in the matter she spoke of to you; but I am sorry to say that I have bad news to give you, for she is seriously ill.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Ill!” exclaimed André, crushing up the letter in his hands, and dashing it upon the floor. “Ill! ill!” he repeated, not heeding the presence of the portress; “why, she may be dead;” and, snatching up his hat, he dashed downstairs into the street.</p>
			<p>As soon as the portress was left alone, she picked up the letter, smoothed it out, and read it.</p>
			<p>“And so,” murmured she, “the little lady’s name was Sabine⁠—a pretty name; and she is ill, is she? I expect that the old gent who called this morning, and asked so many questions about <abbr>M.</abbr> André, would give a good deal for this note; but no, that would not be fair.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
